 
In Canada, the period of time from 1947 to 1964 is often referred to as the  baby boom , while the 
approximately 10 -year period following 1964 is referred to as the  baby bust . In combination, the baby 
boom and baby bust are sometimes referred to as the  baby boom tidal wave . 
The first baby boom  echo  was expected in the mid -1970s —approximately 25 years after the beginning of 
the baby boom —however, only 1974 and 1975 saw a significant increase in the number of births. It was 
not until the period from 1988 to 1995 (with the peak in 1990), that Canada un derwent a true baby boom 
echo as baby boomers had a large number of births. Since that time, the number of births again declined 
with 2000 marking the nadir. In 2000, the number of births was so low, it was below even the lowest point 
during the baby bust period. In the ensuing  years, the birth rate has again moved upward.  
Between 2002 and 2007 there was a slight increase in the number of births as the grandchildren of the 
boomers began their families.  
Baby boom tidal wave  
Only four countries have experienced a baby boom tidal wave of notable severity, namely Canada, United 
States, Australia, and New Zealand. As a result, these countries are experiencing a general aging of their 
populations. However, other countries are also  experiencing population aging as a result of government or 
voluntary fertility controls, including Japan, China, and India.  
The tidal waves in Canada and the United States are often referred to as the post -war baby boom, leading 
one to believe that the increase in births is a direct result of soldiers returning from war. In fact, the baby 
boom can more appropriately be attribut ed to the strong economy of the post -war era in comparison to the 
previous depression era. In the period of a strong economy, couples felt financially secure and could 
afford to have large families.  
Increased Life Expectancies  
Life expectancy is the average number of years of life remaining for a person at a specific age, assuming 
the current mortality rates prevail for the remainder of that person's life. Life expectancies have been 
increasing as the result of advances in medic ine, hygiene, and living standards, as demonstrated in the 
following table:  
Increase in Life Expectancy over Time  
Year At Birth  At Age 65  At Age 75  
Male  Female  Male  Female  Male  Female  
1921  58.8 60.6 13.0 13.6 7.6 8.0 
1941  63.0 66.3 12.8 14.1 7.5 8.2 
1961  68.4 74.2 13.5 16.1 8.2 9.5 
1981  71.9 79.0 14.6 18.9 9.0 11.9 
1996  75.4 81.2 16.0 19.9 9.7 12.4 
2001  76.9 82.0 17.0 20.5 10.3 12.9 
2005  78.0 82.7 17.9 21.1 10.2 12.7 
2008  78.5 83.0 18.2 21.3 11.2 13.5 
2013  79.6 83.8 19.0 21.9 11.8 14.0 
2016  79.9 84.0 19.3 22.1 12.1 14.2 
2019  80.0 84.2 19.5 22.2 12.2 14.2 
2022  79.3 83.8 19.3 22.1 12.1 14.2 
Source: Statistics Canada, Cansim table 84 -537-XIE and 13 -10-0114 -01 
The increase in life expectancy has been even more dramatic for females than it has been for males (an 
increase of 23.2 years for females between 1921 and 2022, compared to 20.5 years for males). As a result, 
the average female can expect to outlive the av erage male by approximately four -and-a-half years. This 
will create a growing social problem, as the majority of late retirees (those over 80) that need support will 
be female. This trend of increased life expectancy will mean a longer period of retirement  for many 
individuals, and therefore, a need for accumulating larger amounts of retirement funds.  
 
Changes in the Population's Age Structure  
The following graphs show how the population distribution has changed in Canada over time. Starting 
with the end of the baby boom, the median age in Canada has been rising and will continue to do so into 
the future. Median age is the point where exactly on e-half of the population is older, and the other half is 
younger. As of 2022, the median age of Canada's population was  approximately 41.0 years.  The 
percentage of the population that was 65 years or older has steadily increased and in 2021 there are now 
more people aged 65 and older than people aged 0 to 14.   
Median age, Canada, 1901 -2011  
 
Canadian Population by Age Group  

 
It is projected that Canada's population will age rapidly until 2031 by which time the entire baby boom 
generation would have attained age 65. After 2031, the population will continue aging, but at a slower 
rate. By 2036,  individuals of traditional retirem ent age (aged 65 and over) will make up  between 23% and 
25% of Canada's total population —nearly double the level in 2009. The number of octogenarians and 
centenarians are also expected to  increase dramatically in the  ensuing  decades.  The percentage of the 
population aged 65 and over  is summarized in the following table:  
Aging of the Canadian Population  
Year Number of People Aged 65 
and over  % of Population Aged 65 
and over  
1961  2,361,000  9.7 
1991  3,173,300  11.8 
2001  3,884,500  13.6 
2011  4,544,000  15.4M  
2021  5,870,600  19.6 
2031  7,128,400  23.9 
2036  9,900,000 - 10,900,000  23.0 - 25.0 
Source: Statistics Canada  
 
Implications for Government Retirement Programs  
As mentioned earlier, the government's social programs began to have a significant effect on retirees in 
the 1960s when the OAS program was strengthened and CPP was introduced. OAS is funded out of 

general tax revenues, while CPP benefits are primarily funded by the contributions of the current labour 
force. This worked reasonably well in the early years, when only about 10% of the population was aged 
65 or over, and life expectancies were about five  to seven years less than they are today. Furthermore, at 
that time, six to seven workers were making CPP contributions for every eligible CPP recipient.  
However, it is during the years between 2017 and 2046 that the baby boomers will have the most 
significant impact on the social retirement programs. By the year 2031, the peak of the boomers' 
retirement years, about 24% of the population will be aged 65 or  over and there will be only 2.6 workers 
to make CPP contributions for every eligible recipient. Based on rapid advances in medicine in general, 
and gerontology in particular, it is possible that life expectancies will continue to increase.  
It is obvious the baby boomers will place an enormous strain on government social programs. The 
number of people of normal retirement age will approximately double over the next 30 years, while the 
active labour force will be reduced by almost half.  
Impact of Changing Family Structure  
Government social programs have also increasingly taken into account the evolution of the Canadian 
family structure. The traditional make up of a family consisting of a mother and father, who are married, 
raising their biological children in one household,  is no longer necessarily the norm.  
Statistics Canada defines a  census family  as: 
• a married couple and the children, if any, of either and/or both spouses  
• a couple living common -law and the children, if any, of either and/or both partners  
• a lone parent of any marital status with at least one child living in the same dwelling and that 
child or, those children  
All members of a particular census family live in the same dwelling. A couple may be of the opposite or 
same sex. Children may be children by birth, marriage, common -law union or, adoption regardless of 
their age or marital status as long as they live in t he dwelling and do not have their own married spouse, 
common -law partner or, child living in the dwelling. Grandchildren living with their grandparent or, 
grandparents but, with no parents present also constitute a census family.  
Implications for Society  
The baby boom tidal wave has been, and will continue to be, a tremendously important factor in the 
shaping of our society, our culture, and our economy. For example, when the baby boomers were young, 
they strained the education system. In some areas, schoo ls that were built to accommodate them now sit 
empty. As the boomers grew older, they married, had children, and bought houses, cars, appliances, and 
furnishings giving a boost to the manufacturing and housing industries.  
In fact, the housing market reached unprecedented levels, both in terms of the number of sales and the 
price of houses, as a direct result of the boomers. However, most of the boomers have purchased their 
homes by now, and the housing market has declined c onsiderably, particularly in terms of the large, 
executive homes that were so popular in the 1980s. Now the older boomers are having an impact on the 
cottage market, as they accumulate enough wealth to purchase recreational properties.  
So, what does this mean for the future? The boomers will continue to shape our culture and our economy. 
In terms of retirement planning, time will transform this generation of borrowers and spenders into savers. 
Initially, the boomers as a group will accum ulate significant amounts of wealth and will collectively form 
a large market for all forms of financial assets including guaranteed investment certificates (GICs) and 
mutual funds.  
As they enter their retirement years, they will draw on this wealth to maintain their incomes. Demand for 
retirement housing, golfing, gardening, senior vacation packages, and so on, can be expected to increase. 
Demand for services that seniors may no long er be able to perform will also increase, including services, 
such as lawn mowing, snow shoveling, and household maintenance.  
As they age, boomers will also make great demands of the medical system. Average per capita health care 
costs begin to increase substantially at about age 50, more than doubling by the time the average 
individual reaches age 65 and continuing to increase d ramatically beyond that age. Thus, if the entire 
population is aging, it can be expected that health care costs will also rise, even without the development 
of costly new procedures or medications.  
Lifecycles and Retirement Expectations  
Retirement is a very personal and individual experience, and different people have different expectations.  
Most people anticipate their retirement, envisioning golden years of relaxation and leisure. However, this 
may mean vastly different things to different people. To some, it might mean the chance to stay at home, 
spend time with the grandchildren, and incre ase their volunteer commitments. To others, it may provide 
the chance to pursue rewarding yet relatively inexpensive hobbies such as gardening, writing, or golf. To 
some, retirement means the chance to travel to exotic destinations, to take that trip aroun d the world, or to 
purchase and enjoy a rural or cottage property —all choices that obviously have significant financial 
implications.  
The need for financial security differs among people as well. Some people are quite comfortable relying 
solely on CPP and OAS benefits, perhaps along with their company pension. Others have significant 
capital investments but refuse to erode that capital b y drawing a retirement income that is in excess of the 
investment income. Some people are adamant about the need to leave an estate to their children. Others 
believe that their financial obligations to their children end once the children reach adulthood a nd are 
quite happy to try and spend every penny before they die.  
Some people are eager to leave the workforce as soon as they are financially able, perhaps encouraged by 
the Freedom 55 concept popularized by London Life. Others set the standard age 65 as their retirement 
objective. A few people dread retirement, unsure of what they are going to do once they no longer work. 
They may postpone retirement indefinitely, choose to work part -time, or even begin a new career. While 
there is certainly nothing wrong with working well past traditional retirement age, and in fact it  can go a 
long way towards helping retirement income, an individual who expects to meet all of his or her living 
expenses by continuing to work as he or she ages may find him or herself in a financial dilemma if he or 
she subsequently becomes incapacitated  by his or her advancing age.  
Thus, no two individuals are likely to approach retirement planning in exactly the same way. Objectives, 
lifestyle expectations, and risk tolerance will all play a part in developing an individual’s retirement plan.  
 
Relationships  
Welcome to the lesson Relationships.  
At the end of this lesson, you will be able to do the following:  
• Distinguish  between Engagement skills and Hard Skills  
• identify who your client is & understand the personal style of your client  
• understanding personality cues  
• understand specific engagement skills and their application  
• helping your clients plan for a retirement well lived  
• develop effective questioning and listening skills  
• What are client engagement skills?  
• Client engagement skills are all about connecting and communicating with your clients at the 
human level. This is the person to person connection that drives trust, confidence and belief. 
Engagement skills are arguably the most difficult but the most impor tant skills to learn in 
becoming a trusted advisor and building a practise. Because human beings are endlessly complex, 
no one approach, or skill will work in all instances. Humans are not only complex, but, they can 
change their ideas, and motivations fro m meeting to meeting and even within the same 
conversation.  
• Client engagement skills are about mastering a set of behaviours and relationship building skills 
that put your customers first and identifies you as a trusted business partner, not just as another 
supplier. It means consciously thinking about your client’ s experience at every touch point. Most 
people who have direct client contact are often too eager to tell clients about their products, 
services or solution. In taking this approach, they position themselves on the opposite side of the 
table; your clients sense it, understand it, know it, and reject it.  
• According to a variety of online definitions, engagement skills are a combination of people skills, 
social skills, communication skills, character traits, attitudes, career attributes, social intelligence 
and emotional intelligence. These skills enable peo ple to effectively navigate their environment, 
work well with others, perform well and achieve their goals with complementing hard skills. 
Whether or not we are aware of it, living in a civilized society, we all possess engagement skills 
albeit, to varying  degrees.  
• In large part, engagement skills are social skills that are intangible but nevertheless, integral in 
effectively dealing with family and friends, co -workers, existing and potential business partners 
and clients and even with complete strangers. Your abilit y and willingness to help others, to work 
in a team environment, to solve problems and to communicate effectively are just a few examples 
of the many different components that make up the skill set known as engagement skills.  
• As a Registered Retirement Consultant (RRC/CR®), the importance of engagement skills in 
attracting and perhaps, more importantly, retaining clients is often understated particularly when 
compared to the more tangible requirements for  hard skills  such as product knowledge, 
educational proficiencies and technical skills. Without minimizing the importance of hard skills - 
clearly, you must be technically competent - the reality is that it is the engagement skills 
demonstrated by you that builds a tru sting, enduring relationship with your clients. An 
RRC/CR® who has strong engagement skills will have the ability to look for clues in a client’s 
body language, voice, word choice and demeanor so that appropriate questions can be asked, and 
a relationship built.  
• By comparison,  hard skills  are usually related to professional knowledge, tools or techniques that 
allow us to work within our profession. Examples of hard skills are: designing a bridge, 
developing software, applying taxation laws, injecting a vaccine.  
• Are Engagement Skills Important?  
• Have you ever found yourself irritated by another person? Have you assessed them as being 
irritating, hardnosed, mushy or just not getting to the point? In short "difficult to get along with". 
Or, perhaps you have struggled to get your message across to an other person. Maybe you have 
tried to communicate your message as clearly as you know how to, and they still aren’t 
understanding you. Maybe you have had the experience of being in a meeting and people don’t 
seem to want to listen to you. All of these scenarios are where engagement sk ills come in to play. 
Strong engagement skills build relationships and assist clear communication.  
• Engagement skills can be described as the bedside manner of a doctor. Two doctors may have an 
equally high degree of education, proficiency and technical skills to treat a given ailment. These 
are hard skills . Beyond your doctor’s competence, wouldn’t you rather be treated by a doctor that 
demonstrates compassion, empathy, respect and attentive listening? Who can eliminate your 
anxiety and fear and restore calm and peace of mind by simplifying complicated medi cal 
concepts into layman’s terms? As a patient, wouldn’t you want your doctor to listen and directly 
address your concerns and to take the necessary steps to ensure you have a clear understanding of 
your circumstances and the implications of the proposed t reatment?  
• Both hard skills and engagement skills must be learned. For example, an RRC/CR® does not have 
an innate understanding of the details of a given investment product or tax concept, it must be 
learned. Engagement skills tend to be more intuitively based on societal norms and accepted 
social practises but also must be learned. We are all  aware the engagement skills of some 
individuals are considerably better than the skills possessed by other individuals. The good news 
is that where we may be lacking, techniques can be learned to improve and expand on the basic 
engagement skills we posses s. 
• The most effective RRC/CR® is one who follows the retirement planning process using his or her 
fundamentally sound hard skills in conjunction with a highly developed suite of engagement 
skills.  
 
Personal Style  
Each person is a very special and unique individual. We have our habits, our culture, our education, our 
ethics and manners. And, we have a personal style, or personality or temperament. We bring our entire 
self to each interaction and environment we encou nter each day. This includes work and the interactions 
with our clients. To be optimally effective and professional it is imperative that we understand how we 
act, react and interact with the world. What makes us tick? What are our hot buttons or frustrati ons? How 
do we prefer to communicate and listen?  
One of the most notable contributions in history was in 460 BC by Hippocrates (often referred to as "the 
father of western medicine"). He observed that people in general seemed to have one of four humours, or 
approaches to life. This discernment of four gr oupings is a common theme that connects many of the most 
predominant personality theories.  
Today there exist many different systems for categorizing personality traits into meaningful patterns. 
Many of these various systems use special vocabulary such as colours, letters, adjectives or other terms to 
describe the same thing - your personality te mperament. If you have integrated any of these terms or 
descriptors into your language you are speaking a type of personality language. For this lesson we will 
use the specific language of Personality Lingo! ( www.personalitylingo.com ) 
Whether you are brand new to personality training or intimately familiar with a favorite system - the 
power of knowing your personality is undeniable, and the power to identify easily the personality of 
others is invaluable. Personality affects everything we do - from how we take in and process information 
to personal preferences and life decisions. Modern scientific studies claim to have found proof that our 
temperament is coded into our DNA, giving even more validity to this time -tested theory. Furthermor e, 
science indicates that personalities are neither race nor gender biased. We may have learned preferences 
for thought and behaviour, but these are external behaviours not innate personality traits.  
If you have ever been in a conversation where people are discussing personality types, it can seem like a 
foreign language to those that don’t understand the vocabulary of that identification system. You could all 
be talking about the same thing but using different terms to describe it.  
Knowing ourselves is the beginning of being able to understand others and build effective relationships 
and solid communication.  
Comparisons of Common Systems  
Colour Systems  
Hippocrates was perhaps the first to reference colour with his four humours. Over the years there have 
been numerous systems that have carried on with this approach and attached a colour label to a particular 
personality. The table below reviews a sampling  of those systems and how they relate to Personality 
Lingo  
 Personality 
Lingo®  Connector  Thinker  Planner  Mover  
Hippocrates    Phlegm    Yellow Bile    Black Bile    Red Blood  
Don Lowry’s True 
Colours    BLUE    GREEN    GOLD    ORANGE  
Colour Lingo    BLUE    GREEN    GOLD    ORANGE  
Personality 
Dimensions    BLUE    GREEN    GOLD    ORANGE  
Insight Learning    BLUE    GREEN    GOLD    ORANGE  
Four Lenses    BLUE    GREEN    GOLD    ORANGE  
Four Windows    BLUE    GREEN    GOLD    ORANGE  
Real Colours    BLUE    GREEN    GOLD    ORANGE  
Spectrum 
Temperaments    BLUE    GREEN    GOLD    ORANGE  
Personality 
Resources    BLUE    GREEN    GOLD    ORANGE  
Colour Code    BLUE/WHITE    RED    Blue – N/A   YELLOW  
Herrmann Brain    RED    BLUE    GREEN    YELLOW  
Ritberger    ORANGE    GREEN    RED    YELLOW  
Birkman    GREEN    BLUE    RED    YELLOW  
  
Letter Descriptor Systems  
The most popular letter systems for Temperament identification are the Myers -Briggs Type Indicator and 
the Keirsey systems. The chart below shows how Myers -Briggs ad Keirsey relate to Personality Lingo:  
 Personality Lingo®  Connector  Thinker  Planner  Mover  
Myers – Briggs  ENFJ, INFJ  
ENFP, INFP  ENTJ, INTJ 
ENTP, INTP  ESTJ, ISTJ ESFJ, 
ISFJ ESFP, ISFP 
ESTP, ISTP  
Keirsey Temperament  NF NT SJ SP 
 
 
Comparisons of Common Systems...continued  
Word Descriptor Systems  
Dating back to the ancient Greeks, there is a long history of adding descriptive adjectives (or labels) to 
each of the four personality styles. The chart below shows how these systems relate to Personality Lingo:  
Personality Lingo® Connector  Thinker  Planner  Mover  
Ancient Greeks  Fire Water  Earth  Air 
Galen  Phlegmatic  Choleric  Melancholic  Sanguine  
Carl Jung  Intuition/Feeling  Intuition/Thinking  Sensing 
(/Judging*)  Sensing 
(/Perceiving*)  
Seasons  Summer  Winter  Autumn  Spring  
Keirsey  Idealist  Rational  Guardian  Artisan  
Keirsey/Bates  Apollonian  Promethean  Epimethean  Dionysian  
Diet Styles  Diet Feeler  Diet Thinker  Diet Planner  Diet Player  
Inner Hero  Helper  Thinker  Planner  Doer  
Helen Fisher  Estrogen/Oxytocin  Testosterone  Serotonin  Dopamine  
Helen Scully  Facilitator  Innovator  Organizer  Liberator  
Character Champions  Blue Dolphin  Green Owl  Gold Ant  Orange Wolf  
*Carl Jung does not explicitly mention a judging or perceiving attitude. The "Judging" and "Perceiving" 
terms are listed here to make a clear distinction between the Planner and Mover temperaments as they 
relate to Carl Jung’s classifications.  
DISC  
DISC  D 
Dominance  I 
Influence  S 
Steadiness  C 
Conscientiousness  
Personality Lingo  Mover/Thinker  Connector/Mover  Planner/Connector  Thinker/Planner  
COLOURS  Orange/Green  Blue/Orange  Gold/Blue  Green/Gold  
Keirsey  SP/NT  NF/SP  SJ/NF  NT/SJ  
ENNEAGRAM  
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 
Planner  Connector  Planner/Connector  Connector  Thinker  Thinker  Mover  Planner  Connector  
SJ NF SJ/NF  NF NT NT SP SJ NF 
  
  
Who Are You?  
So where do you fit? What is your personal style? This is important as who we are on the personality 
level greatly impacts everything we do. Engagement skills, communication, sales, leadership, learning, 
stress management, conflict resolution and more are all influenced by who we are. This is how we act, 
react and interact with the world around us.  
Let’s start with Introvert or Extrovert. Many people erroneously believe that introversion means you are 
shy whereas extroversion means you are not. Both Introverts and Extroverts can be shy. Shyness is the 
fear of social judgement and can be experienced b y either introverts or extroverts.  
A basic definition for Introverts is that they gather or restore their energy from their internal world of 
thoughts, ideas and reflections and Extroverts rejuvenate or gather their energy from the outside world of 
people activities and their environment.  
People with a preference for Extroversion tend to express their most dominant personality traits outward. 
Determining the personality style of someone who is extroverted is usually quite straightforward – what 
you see, is what you get! Introverts on the ot her hand tend to use their primary personality style to process 
internally. They may communicate outwardly and behave in manners that are associated with their 
secondary style. Therefore, extra attention needs to be paid when identifying the personality st yle of 
Introverts.  
 Extroverts (E)  VS 
  Introverts (I)  
• Social Interaction  
• External world of thoughts  
• Breadth  
• Extensive interests  
• Many relationships  
• Gregarious and social  
• After -thinkers  
• About 55% of the population  • Inner concentration  
• Inner world of feelings  
• Depth  
• Intensive interests  
• Few relationships  
• Reflective and thoughtful  
• Fore-thinkers  
• About 45% of the population  
 
 
Importance of Personality Style  
Our personalities are a very important and critical component of who we are, how we respond, how we 
communicate, how we relate and how we process information. This is foundational to learning and using 
excellent engagement skills to build both personal and  professional relationships. As you will learn later 
in this unit, your personality greatly influences how and what you verbalize and hear.  
You could be clearly communicating your message and be completely misunderstood! How? Easily – you 
speak your own language and use words based on your personality. You hear what other people say 
through your ears which filter messages through your own lang uage based on your personality. 
Confusing? Not really it is just thinking of Personality -speaking as another language.  
For example: You could say, "I would like you to come in for a portfolio review." Quite a clear message, 
wouldn’t you agree? But here is what people not like you might hear you saying, "You are in trouble we 
have to talk about your portfolio right now and boy do I have bad news for you!" Where did that come 
from? That isn’t what you said! No, but it is the message that was heard. This is one of the reasons that 
communication can be so difficult!  
Where do we start? Ideally, we start with understanding ourselves. We start to understand how we act, 
react and interact with the world. How do we view the world? What makes our heart happy? What are our 
hot buttons? Understanding ourselves first is the fo undation to being able to start to understand others. 
There are good resources both free and for purchase to explore and discern our personality. You can 
search on -line, connect with a local personality training expert or start with  www.personalitylingo.com  for 
a free, fun, personality quiz that can get you started.  
 
Personality Overview  
In many models there are 4 quadrants that describe type, preferences or behaviours. If you are familiar 
with another model, use the charts above to find your fit in our model. The following is a very brief 
overview using the Personality Lingo model of Move r, Thinker, Connector, and Planner.  
 Mover  Playful, high energy, easily bored, loves freedom and new ideas. Creative, great negotiators, always up for an 
adventure. Loves novelty and being on the leading edge, lives in the moment.  
• Strengths: embrace change, think outside of the box, love a challenge, high energy, playful and fun, very 
gregarious. Visual communicator.  
• Challenges: easily bored, short attention span, frustrated by status quo, don’t always think before speaking.  
Communication Tips  
• If you are a Mover: don’t interrupt, focus on the speaker, tone down the volume, limit wordiness and 
conversation  
• Speaking to a Mover: Tell "people" stories, give colourful details, give attention, don’t tune out.  
Thinker  Logical, analytical, naturally curious, love knowledge and learning, perpetual learner. Able to easy conceptualize, 
reserved, appreciate being given the time to think and process. Live in the future.  
• Strengths: very knowledgeable, independent and able to work alone, reserved and proper, analytical and 
innovative. Frequently ask, "Why?"  
• Challenges: may come across as a "know -it-all" or arrogant, fact based rather than emotionally sensitive, very 
demanding of themselves and others.  
Communication Tips  
• If you are a Thinker: practise saying "please" and "thank -you". Focus on the person not the project. Practise 
active listening, read to the end of the letter.  
• Speaking to a Thinker: Use bullet points, not small details or stories. Give the bottom line first, give additional 
details only if asked, ask questions, expect the "why" statement.  
Connector  Supportive, kind, positive, crave connection to others. Great imagination with love of the arts, a real people person, 
very collaborative and a natural mediator. Lead with their heart and easily identify and relate to the emotional state of 
others. Seek pe rsonal growth and meaning  
• Strengths: open and accepting, love to communicate, very cooperative, natural mediators, caring and 
compassionate, creative and empathetic. Soft spoken.  
• Challenges: extremely sensitive, lead with their heart, often supress their own needs and wants, tentative in 
communicating their needs.  
Communication tips:  
• If you are a Connector: express your opinion, share ideas, practise making and expressing choices, speak more 
quickly and boldly.  
• Speaking to a Connector: show respect and look for the positive, freely give praise, give focused attention, 
wait to speak until they are completely finished, give a few choices.  
Planner  Conscientious and dependable, reliable, organized, makers of lists. Know and follow the rules, guidelines and 
legislation. Steadfast, goal driven, believe in right and wrong. Strong sense of duty and commitment to the job at hand.  
• Strengths: organized, productive, prepared, value citizenship, community service. Follow directions, follow 
through on tasks, hard working, loyal and responsible.  
• Challenges: need to have a plan and clear instructions or directions, resist imposed change, puts others on an 
agenda, not tolerant of casual time management or being surprised.  
Communication tips:  
• If you are a Planner: don’t overwhelm others with details, give praise when due, celebrate incremental 
improvements, adjust your expectations, appreciate contributions of others.  
• Speaking to a Planner: first ask if it is a good time to talk, respect their time/space/silence. Give factual and 
orderly details. Be prepared – think through what you will say. Wait for their response.  
  
Our personality or personal style influences every aspect of life. One thought you may be having is "Yes, 
but I can relate to all of the above". Yes, that is true. We do have the ability to choose our behaviours 
depending on the relationship or circumstanc e. Most people have one or more commonly two personality 
styles that are their dominant style that they most often operate from. A suggested resource is the book 
"Personality Lingo" by Mary Miscisin M.S. available through Amazon or her web site. The book g oes 
into much detail and includes information on identifying your style, communication, stress and being 
your best.  
Identifying the Personal Style of Clients  
Now that we can identify our own preferences, how do we quickly and easily identify the personal style 
of our clients?  
We started by learning how to identify our personality, our strengths and challenges and some basic 
communication tips. How do we quickly and easily identify our client’s personal style and how can we 
best relate to them? Can I not just be myself? Yes, you  can. Use the strengths of your personality to build 
relationships and client lists while respecting the personality of others. Learn to speak their languages and 
you will be well on the way to enhanced engagement with your clients.  
As humans we take our personality everywhere we go. Both you and your client will give reliable clues as 
to preferred personal style which are easy to read if you know what to look for. We want to look for 
visible clues – things we can see, vocal clues - that which we can hear, and some general environmental 
clues – observable elements. Is this three -fold method 100% accurate? No, but then neither is a self -test! 
An easy three step process goes like this:  
i. Observe visible, vocal and general clues … take a guess as to which Personality Style you think is 
being shown by your client,  
ii. Ask them a question from the information below and listen to their answer  
iii. If your initial assessment wasn’t correct based on the answer you received, you can easily adjust 
your approach and ask another question.  
It is OK to explore your perception before making a determination of the conversational approach you 
will take based on the preferred style. By learning what to observe it can give you a very good starting 
point, a reliable way to be respectful of the indi vidual and their "way of being".  
Here is some great news! No personality, style or preference is better or worse than any other! There is no 
good personality vs "bad" personality, we are different but equal. Also, there is no gender bias between 
personalities. There is no personality that  is for women and one for men, there is a relatively even 
distribution of the genders between the personality styles. Celebrate – who we are - what we are - and we 
can choose to operate within our strengths!  
 
The Mover  
Basic desire is to be noticed and to have fun.  
What you see  • Clothing: often bright and/or intense colours, trendy threads, beads and sparkles, colourful ties often 
with graphics, fun socks, novelty sweaters that tell a story.  
• Activity: high energy, constant movement, big gestures and movements, often touches others – clap on 
the back, fist bump, tap on the shoulder. Can forget to respect the personal space of others.  
• Focus: very impetuous, easily distracted "squirrel!", tends to what is right in front of them, irreverent 
humour!  
• Emotions: highly charged and changeable. Emotions are not hidden, happy is elation, sad is devastating 
and responses are based on the current state of emotion. May have several changes from high to low in 
a short span of time.  
What you hear  • Volume: usually quite loud and easily heard across the room. Often have a very loud and distinctive 
laugh. Even whispers carry quite far.  
• Language: not afraid to make up their own words or use slang. May use edgy and just barely 
appropriate language, jokes, metaphors and fun terminology.  
• General: love to tell stories to make a point or just entertain. Very visual and graphic with a wide eyed 
"who me?" innocence of expression. Speak very quickly with great excitement and can quickly change 
the subject as they can be easily distracted.  
Environmental Clues  • Personal work space can be quite chaotic. May appear to be disorganized but they will know where 
everything is.  
• Engage in high energy activities and possibly extreme sports. Love to challenge themselves and then 
tell a great story about their adventures.  
• Always open to new ideas, adventures or products. Rely on the research and opinions of others.  
 
 
The Thinker  
Basic desire is to be in charge and have control  
 What you see  • Clothing: often wears the strong power colours – black, red, navy blue, royal blue. Power clothing such 
as jacket and slacks, logoed clothing, not usually seen wearing ultra casual such as baggy jogging pants 
and sweatshirts. Conservative jewellery.  
• Activity: quick and active with purposeful movements. Each action has a reason. Able to be completely 
still, alert and watchful.  
• Focus: very decisive and direct. Always alert and watchful, easily takes charge of a conversation or 
situation. Focussed eye contact.  
• Emotions: not readily apparent. Operates from logic rather than emotion. Emotional layer is very deep 
and when they rise to the surface are expressed very strongly. Intolerant of sloppy work and mistakes 
and easily angered.  
What you hear  • Volume: not necessarily loud but strong and direct. Will speak over others without raising their voice. 
Genuine laughter is of moderate volume.  
• Language: use technical language and correct terminology. Knows how to spell and pronounce the big 
words and may use their vocabulary as a weapon rather than a tool. Enjoy utilizing a robust lexicon.  
• General: Want to know what you know. Asks many questions and will listen appreciatively to the 
answer. May challenge your knowledge or assumptions, respects intellectual discourse.  
Environmental 
Clues  • Personal workspace will likely have evidence of several projects on the go at once. Also, research books, 
models, prototypes or equipment. Love technology and the access to learning and knowledge that it 
represents.  
• Enjoy doing difficult things. Love the challenge of hard work, technically precise activities and pushing 
themselves to the limit while controlling their environment.  
• Naturally curious and thirsty for knowledge they enjoy solving problems and inventing better ways of 
doing things.  
• Prefer to keep their emotions to themselves and are slow to trust.  
The Connector  
Basic desire is to have peace and no conflict  
What you see  • Clothing: prefer comfortable and soft textured clothing. Soft knits, elastic waist, unstructured suits 
and sweaters. Soft colours, pastels, browns, blues, greens, earth tones.  
• Activity: very relaxed and laid back, low energy. Peaceful and calm, even in chaos  
• Focus: will focus exclusively on those they are in conversation with. Pay close attention to 
feelings, language and environment around them.  
• Emotions: lead with their heart. Very peaceful and calm, seldom have extremes of emotion. 
Balanced and rational.  
What you hear  • Volume: most often quiet spoken with much feeling in their tone and expressions.  
• Language: use emotional words such as "I feel …" very descriptive language, use lots of 
adjectives  
• General: usually good listeners with strong focus on your words and how you are saying them. 
Very emotionally intuitive, can easily pick up your current emotional state.  
Environmental clues  • Have many friends and prefer to be in a group or working as a team. Would rather work with 
people than things or tools.  
• Casual about their surroundings unless it comes to comfort items. Work area will have pictures of 
family and friends and some fun conversational objects. May have rocks or bottles of sand that 
have emotional meaning to them  
• Wear their hearts on their sleeves and are ready to be glad or sad as the situation requires. Very 
openly emotional.  
•  Always put the needs of others ahead of themselves. Very cause oriented, people, animals, 
environment etc.  
The Planner  
Basic desire is to have perfection and organization  
What you see  • Clothing: the correct clothing for each activity. Tucked in, buttoned up, correct and proper, not 
necessarily stuffy or stiff.  
• Activity: very persistent and thorough, need to finish what they start. Likes to organize things and 
data – uses charts and graphs.  
• Focus: prefer to focus on tasks rather than people. Very artistic and deeply sensitive. Can shut out the 
world to focus on a task.  
• Emotions: very deeply emotional, quiet tears at a beautiful sunset or picture. Keep feelings to 
themselves but are the most emotionally sensitive. You just don’t see it.  
What you hear  • Volume: quiet -spoken, low tone, unemotional or intense. Very quiet laugh or chuckle. Do not draw 
attention to themselves.  
• Language: Uses correct and precise language and terminology. Clear expectations and terminology, 
very articulate.  
• General: a very clear communicator that may start a conversation in their head and begin orally half 
way through. Very organized thoughts and may speak in a "list".  
Environmental clues  • Very tidy, everything in its place. Difficult to replace items when they are still useful. May have 
"hoarder" tendencies as it is hard to part with familiar objects.  
• Works space will be very organized and likely minimalistic – one file or sheet of paper at a time on 
the desk. Cannot think or work in clutter  
• Work very well alone without supervision. Prefer to be given the job, the expectations, and the 
deadline and then be left alone to work.  
• Like to follow the rules and procedures, most comfortable in a formal environment where everyone 
knows and follows the rules.  
Conversational Personality Clues  
How can we begin to get a sense of our clients, colleagues, friends or family’s personality without asking 
them to take an assessment or use a tool to evaluate them? What are some questions or conversation 
openers we can use to get off on the right foot?  
The following are some ideas with the answers that may guide you in the right direction to determine 
which personality quadrant fits.  
What is your 
idea of a 
great 
vacation?    Mover: White water rafting or other high 
energy activities – hiking, scuba diving, 
zip-lining  
Thinker: A scientific expedition or other 
learning experience – Galapagos, the 
pyramids, historic hike  
Connector: Romantic get -away, family trip, 
holiday with friends – cottage at the lake, 
cabin in the woods  
Planner: Traditional family vacation, 
preferably low cost – return to same place 
each year.  
      
How would 
others 
describe you?  
    Mover: Quick to take action and eager to 
grab a problem and solve it  
Thinker: Curious, knowledgeable, a great 
problem solver  
Connector: Friendly, gets along well with 
others, lots of friends  
Planner: Prepared, likes to plan ahead, 
"boy -scout"  
      
If you won 
the lottery, 
what is the 
first thing 
you would do 
with the 
money?    Mover: Throw a big party and rent a limo to 
go get the cheque with a bunch of friends  
Thinker: Create a new venture or business 
and invest in learning or education  
Connector: Share it with family and friends, 
give to charity  
Planner: Put it in the bank, consult with a 
lawyer, banker and planner and make a 
solid plan.  
      
How do you 
make 
decisions?    Mover: Flip a coin! Impulse, what seems 
best at the moment with the information 
available  
Thinker: Logic and research. Explore all 
options and rate past successes and 
outcomes  
Connector: What feels right for the 
situation  
Planner: Past precedents and the correct 
procedures.  
      
How do you 
relate to 
people?    Mover: I make friends easily, people seem 
to like me, I like to think that I collect 
people.  
Thinker: I usually like to be with people, 
things seem to go better if I am in charge.  
Connector: I like watching people and 
connecting. It gives me a good picture of 
what they are like  
Planner: I prefer to observe and go beneath 
the surface to see the real person.  
      
Apart from 
the 
necessities of 
life, food, 
shelter, 
clothing, 
what do you 
spend your 
money on?    Mover: Going out with friends, adventure, 
having fun and looking good  
Thinker: I buy good quality, name brand 
items that are life enhancing tools  
Connector: Comfort items and convenience 
products  
Planner: I don’t spend, I prefer to save 
every spare cent  
      
Conversational Personality Clues...continued  
If a 
disaster 
struck, 
how do 
you think 
you 
would 
react?    Mover: Look for the sunny side and move on  
Thinker: I would need to figure out what 
happened and why  
Connector: I would be very emotionally 
distraught and worried about other people  
Planner: I would use my emergency plan and 
make the best of it.  
      
If you 
could be 
anything 
you 
wanted to 
be, what 
would 
you do?    Mover: An actor, artisan or entrepreneur  
Thinker: An inventor or explorer or researcher  
Connector: A spiritual guru, social convener, 
secret contributor  
Planner: Chief executive, philanthropist.  
      
What 
words 
describe 
you the 
best?    Mover: Bold, adventurous, brave, fun  
Thinker: Competent, knowledgeable, hard 
working  
Connector: Compassionate, warm, caring, 
friendly  
Planner: Practical, dependable, responsible, 
frugal  
      
What is 
your 
attitude 
toward 
managing 
money?    Mover: I have better things to do than keeping 
track of my money – that’s your job!  
Thinker: I feel out of control and disorganized 
if I am not in total charge of my finances.  
Connector: Finances intimidate me, and I don’t 
feel the need to check my balances every day.  
Planner: I have a spreadsheet detailing every 
bill I pay, and items purchased.  
      
What 
process 
did you 
use when 
you 
bought 
your last 
car?   Mover: I bought what I liked and then thought 
about how to pay for it later  
Thinker: I researched and found a good 
compromise between what I wanted and what I 
could afford  
Connector: I ended up spending more than I 
planned to but I got the colour and features I 
wanted.  
Planner: I researched every detail and made 
sure it would fit my budget and driving needs.  
      
(just for 
fun) 
If an 
extra -
terrestrial 
appeared 
at your 
front 
door, 
what 
would 
you do?  
    Mover: Grab it, capture it and show it to my 
friends  
Thinker: Ask it where it was from and how it 
got to my front porch  
Connector: Try to befriend it and invite it in  
Planner: Close the door and call the authorities  
The responses above are in general terms and most respondents will use their own words and thoughts. 
However, this is a good guide to help with your ongoing communication and professional relationship 
building. Personality comes into significance when talk ing about and planning financial matters, life 
issues and retirement considerations.  
Communication  
Communication is a gift to both the speaker and the receiver. Therefore, is stands to reason that being a 
solid communicator will stand a professional in very good stead. Let’s look at what good communication 
is and isn’t.  
First, communication is not talking. You may have heard the age -old question, "If someone talks in the 
woods and no -one is there to hear them, are they communicating?" Talking, is just that, talking. 
Communication is the giving and taking of information, i deas, concepts or messages. Without a receiver, 
communication has not occurred. Without a message being sent in a way that the receiver can 
comprehend and respond to, communication has not happened well. How do we ensure that we 
communicate in the most eff ective way we can? The following ideas, techniques and instructions will 
assist with that.  
As a Registered Retirement Consultant, you are communicating with clients, colleagues, other 
professionals and many other people. Some conversations are easy, some are more difficult but good 
communication skills will help you with all types of communicati on. 
Communication consists of good speaking skills and solid listening skills, coupled with respecting and 
understanding how best to communicate with the person’s individual style. In other words, 
communicating from your voice to their ears.  
If you were to greet a Mover client with energy and excitement, asking about their latest adventure – you 
would open the communication doors. Ask about their goals for the future and then suggest some low 
maintenance easy to follow strategies with an eleme nt of "safe risk" and some fun … they will listen to 
you. 
Greet a Thinker that way – and they will not respond to you. Instead, be well prepared and able to answer 
the questions or know where to find the answers in preparation of the meeting. Minimize the greeting and 
ask, "How may I best serve you today", listen  and respond with a bullet point list and they will appreciate 
that you are respecting their needs for brevity and knowledge. A strategy where they feel in control of the 
process and investments may be most successful.  
A Connector client  needs to know that you care for them personally and are interested in them as a 
person. Greet them warmly, remembering details about their family or activities. Spend time setting the 
stage and building or renewing a relationship before asking how you may  help them on this visit. Again, a 
low maintenance easy to follow strategy or plan may be most well received.  
Planners are very reserved and do not easily share personal information. Explaining why the potentially 
intrusive questions need to be asked will be helpful. Be prepared with the information written down in 
detail so they may review it, take it away for re view and plan another meeting to make decisions or ask 
more questions. Planning will take time and considerable sharing of information will be required for the 
relationship to be solidified.  
Movers and Connectors are both people and relationship focussed. You will enjoy warm handshakes, 
open conversation and ease of relationship building with either. Conversely, both Thinkers and Planners 
are more interested in the task or information than con necting on the personal level. Both present a "calm, 
cool and collected" front and prefer a minimum of personal conversation, preferring to focus instead on 
the business of the meeting.  
The first stage of developing good engagement skills is being able to easily identify which personal style 
your client is likely operating from and building a professional relationship that respects their needs and 
values. The second stage of enhancing eng agement requires developing effective Communication Skills 
like: Attending, Soliciting, Reacting & Structuring.  
Attending Skills  
To attend means simply to give heed to, or to be present with. If you really pay attention to someone, you 
are indirectly telling them that they are important (i.e.: affirming their self -worth) Furthermore, you 
dramatically increase the chances of understa nding both the stated and implicit messages in someone’s 
communication. According to Dr. Kris Magnusson of Simon Fraser University, one of the most important 
determinants of how well you will be able to establish rapport with others is the degree to which they 
perceive you to be attending to them. Attending skills are primarily physical behaviours that let other 
people know that you are focussing on them. A well -recognised model for basic attending skills is the 
SOLAR model.  
SOLAR model  
Setting the stage is the starting point for a good meeting. Dr. Norm Amundsen, a respected long -term 
Faculty of Education member of the University of British Columbia, crafted the SOLAR model and 
described it in his text book "Active Engagement" as the sta rting point for developing a professional 
relationship. The stage is set very purposefully in how the meeting area is set up. Often an office will have 
a desk with you on one side and your client(s) on the other. This is the least optimal configuration. If  
possible a round table is much preferred or a set of chairs facing each other with casual tables at the side 
for coffee cup and writing tablet to indicate no barriers and a sense of equality of all participants.  
The SOLAR model stands for Square position, Open posture, Leaning in, Asking open questions, and 
Reflecting back what you have believed you have heard. This is an easy to remember and apply – once 
learned – process that will allow you to maximize your time  in the client meeting.  
S - Square position  
Squarely face your client, whether across a desk or table, or in facing chairs. This gives the opportunity 
for direct eye contact and the most room for expressive movement. It is easy to speak directly and to 
listen actively when sitting face to face.  
O - Open posture  
An open posture is where your hands and arms are relaxed and resting on the table, or desk or on the arms 
of chairs. Arms and legs are not crossed, the opposing elbows are not firmly clenched in your hands and 
your shoulders and neck are relaxed. For some people the habit of crossing their legs is firmly entrenched. 
If possible practise crossing legs at the ankles, not the knees as this can still present an "open" attitude to 
your client. Being physically open in your posture allows you to hear what is in t he conversation, a closed 
posture – with crossed arms or legs indicates defensiveness. Be open, engaging and vulnerable to 
facilitate relationship building. Open shows listening, closed indicates decision is made, no longer 
listening.  
L - Lean in to the conversation  
Rather than leaning back into your chair lean in toward your client at a comfortable level. Leaning 
slightly towards your client conveys interest and focus. Think about a social environment you may have 
been in – you lean in when you are engaged, listening , or engrossed in what you are hearing. Leaning 
back gives the appearance of avoidance or superiority. Leaning in shows interest, engagement and 
openness to the ideas being expressed.  
A - Ask open questions  
Open questions do not have a predefined answer. They allow for the engagement and exploration of ideas 
and thoughts and provide a lot of information. A guideline would be questions that begin with how, what, 
where, why, or when. For example: "What are some  of the elements you consider when making plans for 
your future?" An open question gives the respondent full breadth of thought and opinion in their response. 
As you listen you may hear information or ideas that will help you in your further exploring for 
suggestions, solutions or pathways. If in doubt, ask  yourself "What would Dr. Phil say?" Likely he would 
say "And how is that working for you?" a very open question.  
R - Reflect what you believe you have heard  
Always double check to ensure that your perception of what you thought you have heard, is indeed what 
the person believes they have said. WHAT? Think about a mirror for words. In some ways we are a mirror 
to our client’s world. Remember that there are alwa ys 2 sides to a conversation. What the speaker believes 
they have said, and what the listener believes they have heard. There are two elements at work here, 
personality and perception. How we speak and how we perceive the message is influenced by our 
perso nality, in other words our perception of the message.  
An individual may say, "I want to plan a party for our staff." Straight forward – right? Not necessarily. 
Are they saying that they want to do the work of invitations, setting the venue, menu and activities and 
cleaning up? Or, that they have the big pictu re idea but want to get a party plan team together to divide 
the work? Or, they are just floating the idea to see what the response is? Or, they would like to plan a 
party, but the timing is off, or there are other environmental considerations that could m ake it difficult?  
Your client may say, "I plan on doing a lot of travelling". Straight forward, right? Wrong! What does 
travelling mean to them? Is it a transatlantic cruise or a car trip to visit relatives? Does it involve 
exploring new countries and cultures or exploring previously unexplored parts of their own province? 
What does travelling mean to them – and equally important, their spouse! Secondly what does "a lot" 
mean to them? Is it more than they are currently travelling? Is it half the year or more than 2 small tri ps a 
year? Have they thought about what "travelling a lot more" means in their life plan or are they just 
musing out loud and floating out some ideas? Reflecting what you think you have heard is critical to 
ensuring both communicators are following the sam e track or logic. Your response could be, "For a 
comparison, what kind of travelling are you doing now?"  
Reflecting what you think you have heard is critical to ensuring both communicators are following the 
same track or logic. Your response could be," What ideas have you come up with so far?"  
Soliciting Skills  
Soliciting is the art of eliciting information. To solicit is to "obtain by persuasion, entreaty or formal 
application". We will explore 4 specific communication soliciting skills: closed -ended questions, open -
ended questions, declarative probes and prompt s. 
Closed -ended Questions  – or closed questions can be answered with Yes or No or a one or two -word 
answer.  
Example : "Is it raining?" – Yes. "Are you cold?" - No "What is your name?" – Tom Jones . "Where do you 
live?" – 123 Somewhere Street . 
Forms are often completed using closed ended questions. Closed questions are useful for eliciting known 
information where the individual is not required to give additional information or speculate or describe 
information or situations. Closed questions are  not bad questions, they have very specific uses.  
Open -ended Questions  – or open questions require a fuller, more informative and robust response. Open 
questions have sentences, lists and stories as answers and allow respondents to include more information, 
including feelings, attitudes and understanding of the subject. They often start with "How, why, what". 
Open questions lead to conversation and the sharing of thoughts, ideas and information.  
Example:  "What do you imagine your first day of retirement will be like?" – I am going to get up early, 
make coffee, read the paper and wave to everyone going by on their way to work. Then I will take my dog 
for a walk. For lunch …  
As you can see, an open question elicits so much more.  
Declarative Probes  – are functionally like open -ended questions but are less interrogative. It is suggested 
that a declarative probe is a "polite command". Their use is to get more information, to have the 
respondent open up and tell more. A declarative pr obe is "Tell me more about that please.", "Elaborate a 
bit for me".  
In conversation with a client they may say something like, "I am worried that I won’t have any friends 
when I retire." – Elaborate a bit for me please . "Well, I have been working long hours and the only people 
I hang out with are the ones at work. If I stop going to work, I stop having friends." – Tell me more about 
that please.  "When I get home from work I am tired and just want to eat, watch TV and go to bed. I don’t 
have the time or energy to join a group or meet the neighbours… "  
Use of a declarative probe brings out more and more detail and information giving a more complete 
picture of the concern, consideration or contemplation without making the person being asked feel like 
they are on the hot seat.  
Prompts  – are used to gently assist or encourage a hesitating speaker to say something or to continue with 
what they were saying. A prompt is used to move the conversation along. Prompts are short one or two -
word phrases or non -verbal vocal noises. Hmmmm, What else? Go on, And then … ?  
Example:  "My spouse thought I should come to see you " - UmHmmmm"  Our brother in law is one of 
your clients and he seems to be quite happy with the results of his portfolio " - Go on…"  
Basic Reacting Skills  
Reacting skills are what we use when it is our turn to speak, or to respond or to react to what we believe 
we have heard. It gives us the opportunity to ensure that we are on the same level of understanding as the 
person we are engaging with. Reacting skil ls cover three levels of understanding; auditory – what we 
believe we have heard; perceived intention, significance or substance – what it means to us and emotional 
– how the words make us feel or respond.  
Reflecting verbal content   
The most basic verbal mirroring technique, is also known as paraphrasing. In a reflection of verbal 
content, only the actual content of the spoken message is reflected back to the client – no inferences or 
interpretations are added. A level one reflection looks like this:  
Client: Boy, I’ve been feeling really tired lately.  
RRC/CR® – You’ve been really tired lately.  
Notice how no new information was added and the client’s own words were used. Although it may seem 
pedantic or redundant, reflection of verbal content does serve a useful purpose. Some clients are nervous 
or under emotional stress. It helps them to hear wh at they are saying and determine if their description is 
an accurate one. This provides a relatively safe response to the client, helping to build trust.  
  
A level two verbal reflection uses the same words as the client but changes the order:  
Client: Boy,  I’ve been feeling really tired lately.  
RRC/CR®: Lately you’ve been really tired.  
This forces the client to at least reconsider what has been said and determine if it makes sense. Again, no 
new information was added but through changing the order of the words the client gets a chance to 
reconsider what was said.  
  
A level three verbal reflection closely resembles a paraphrase. When you paraphrase something, you are 
essentially translating the message into your own words:  
Client: Boy,  I’ve been feeling really tired lately.  
RRC/CR®: You’re feeling exhausted?  
You are giving the exact same message back but using your own words. No new information has been 
added but because your word may not express the client intent exactly it should be offered tentatively. 
This gives your client the opportunity to correct your words and fill in with their own.  
Reflective Meaning  
Reflecting meaning  is similar to a reflection of verbal content, with the added component of inference. 
Sometimes it is necessary to infer what the other person meant or seemed to say but didn’t actually say it 
directly. You are intending to infer the mean ing of the statement. These inferences which are common in 
"normal" conversations (where most people assume but do not verbalize their inferred meaning) need to 
be reflected back to the client to ensure that our interpretations of the implied meaning are t he correct 
ones.  
When we look for unstated meanings in client statements, we are leaving ourselves open for error. We 
might be making an assumption about what the client means that is totally wrong. That is why it is 
important to verbalize what you think your client means.  Not only does a reflection of meaning ensure 
that you are on track, but it also gives the client time for reflection. By reflecting "This is what you seem 
to be saying" you give the client permission to correct any mistaken assumptions or interpretations.  
Again, it is important to be tentative. This can be accomplished by using a tentative lead in such as "It 
seems to me that …" or "Do you mean …?"  
Client: I am worried about my job. I’ve missed the last two weeks because I have been very sick."  
RRC/CR®: It seems you are worried that you are behind at work and will struggle to get caught up. Is that 
right?"  
Some people like to preface a reflection of meaning with a reflection of verbal content. This ensures that 
the actual content was heard and provides a springboard for making an inference. Using this technique, 
the response to the above comment might look s omething like this:  
RRC/CR®: So, illness has kept you away from work for two weeks and now you are feeling worried? 
(wait for nod or acknowledgement) Is that because you think you’ve gotten too far behind to catch up?"  
Note there are other equally plausible inferences that could have been made. If the "wrong" inference is 
made, the client will quickly let you know. The point is, it is better to verbalize these assumptions so that 
the client can clarify or correct where n ecessary.  
Reflecting Affect (Feeling)  
Reflecting affect (feeling)  is a reflection of the feelings behind a client statement. As with reflections of 
meaning, reflection of affect must be done tentatively. This is one of the most powerful tools that can be 
used. It helps to defuse negative emoti ons that may be getting in the way of a client’s capacity to deal 
with problem situations. Acknowledgement of feelings such as anger, fear or frustration is often a first 
step in resolving a negative situation. Consider this:  
Client:  There is so much information coming at me from all sides that I just don’t know what to do!  
RRC/CR®: "Sounds like you are getting quite frustrated?"  
Client:  "You bet I am! I am just buried in brochures, and papers and web sites …"  
RRC/CR®: "In addition to the frustration you sound overwhelmed and maybe a little desperate?"  
Client:  "Yes, you have nailed it!"  
A number of alternative responses are possible – as you gain more practise with communication skills, 
you will begin to pick up on the verbal and non -verbal cues of the interaction and be able to identify the 
"correct" feeling more readily.  
Effective Reflections  
There are two major problems in learning how to do effective reflections: recognizing a meaning or 
emotion and identifying or labeling it. We often deal in shades of meaning, and the subtle differences in 
meaning between two words may be key. Here is a min i glossary that may be a useful tool:  
Ideas for  empathetic response leads:  
• Kind of feeling …  
• Sort of saying …  
• I am picking up that you …  
• If I am hearing you correctly …  
• Kind of makes (made) you feel …  
• What I guess I am hearing is …  
• I wonder if you are expressing a concern that …  
• You place a high value on …  
• I read you as …  
• Your message seems to be, "I …  
• So, your world is a place where you …  
  
Some affective vocabulary:  
Words to convey 
affection:  love, friendly, caring, 
like, fond of, respect, admire, 
trust, close, adore, devoted, 
regard, tenderness, attachment, 
yearning, longing, infatuated, 
passionate, cherish, idolize.  Words to convey 
happiness:  glee, contented, 
joyous, ecstatic, glad, merry, 
lively, jovial, animate, elated, 
genial, buoyant, bright, saucy, 
jolly, playful, zest, thrilled, Words to convey 
strength:  responsible, confident, 
alive, adequate, powerful, 
certain, sure, efficient, 
important, competent, effective, 
superior, cope, potent, able, 
bliss, tickled, sensational, 
terrific, good, neat.  lucid, adaptable, forceful, 
effectual,  
Words to convey 
confusion:  bewildered, puzzled, 
flustered, overwhelmed, mixed 
up, muddled, perplexed, tumult, 
chaos, jumbled, uncertain, 
undecided, ambivalent, drifting, 
baffled, trapped, in a quandary.  Words to convey hurt:  used, put 
down, neglected, rejected, 
demeaned, scorned, criticized, 
belittled, shot down, cast off, 
discarded, devastated, ripped 
off humiliated, betrayed, 
exploited, embarrassed, 
maligned.  Words to convey 
unhappiness:  low, sad, dejected, 
depressed, down, lost, blue, 
melancholy, brood, dreary, flat, 
joyless, somber, gloomy, 
dreadful, dismal, empty, grim, 
desolate, awful, terrible, 
disappointed.  
Words to convey anger:  rage, 
resentment, irritation, fury, 
annoyance, provoked, infuriate, 
inflamed, displeasure, 
animosity, wrath, indignation, 
exasperate, pique, huff, morose, 
seethe, offend, rile, outraged, 
mad.  Words to convey fear:  timid, 
diffident, anxious, worried, 
apprehensive, doubt, qualm, 
hesitant, fright, terror, scared, 
nervous, restless, trepidation, 
intimidated, creeps, shivers, 
jumpy, worried, uneasy, unsure.  Words to convey guilt:  blame, 
regret, shame, embarrassed, at 
fault, reprehensible, wrong, 
remorseful, crummy, rotten, 
humiliated, unforgivable, 
mortified, ashamed, disgraceful.  
 
Structuring Skills  
Without structure, conversations and client meetings can become meaningless drifting from topic to topic 
with little sense of direction, accomplishment or purpose. There is a need to manage interviews in a 
manner that allows clients full opportunity for ex pressions, and yet still provide a context for learning, 
growth and decisions. Structure provides meaning and maximized opportunity. In this section we will 
look at three structuring skills: Summaries, Overviews and Transitions.  
Summaries  
One of the most useful ways to organize the content of an interview is to make frequent use of summaries. 
Summaries condense the content of an interview – or portion thereof – into the key points or issues that 
were raised. Effective summaries have a numbe r of useful functions:  
• They help keep both parties in the conversation focussed on the issue at hand.  
• They provide context for comparison, thereby helping your client to sort out what issues belong 
together, and which ones are unrelated.  
• They provide ways of demonstrating that you are effectively tracking what is being said  
• They provide a means of monitoring progress toward a conversational goal.  
• They can be used as a source of feedback and encouragement for your client.  
Summaries are used in a variety of situations. They may be used as part of the meeting opening with a 
repeat client ("Let’s just review what we did last time we met.") When used as part of an overview, a 
summary simply identifies the major themes that were  previously discussed.  
RRC/CR®: "As I recall, you were going to discuss with your spouse the options for pension splitting and 
TFSA contributions. You were going to get some information from your employers and banks and read 
over some of the literature that I shared with you. Have I go t all of that right?"  
Every interview or meeting should also close with a summary. Summarize the entire session including the 
main theme and activities. Sometimes a summary may not seem too different from some of the Reflecting 
skills previously discussed. There are however a c ouple of important distinctions. First, a summary never 
includes new content or information that your client has not yet had a chance to respond to. Summaries 
should not contain any new inferences of meaning, feeling or behaviour. Second, summaries contain  more 
than one piece of information to respond to; reflections, on the other hand, only deal with one issue, 
thought or feeling at a time.  
Overview Structuring Skills  
Overviews, used at the beginning of a meeting or interview, give a general picture of where the session 
will be going. A good overview provides a framework for both the content and the process for the 
upcoming interaction. This ensures there are few surpri ses or hidden agendas, and both parties can 
concentrate on the discussion at hand. It is good practise to include an overview at the beginning of each 
client meeting. An overview should contain at least four major components.  
i. A brief description of how you intend to approach the meeting, interview or issue  
ii. Your clients and your expectations should be clarified. Here you explain what is expected from 
your client and in turn what your client can expect from you.  
iii. Your client should be given some indication about how much time is likely to be needed and the 
general structure of how the meeting will proceed. This includes the length of each meeting and 
how many meetings will be needed.  
iv. An agreement to proceed is reached based on the previously mentioned conditions and 
expectations.  
RRC/CR®: "John, it is good to meet you. I know you have been working with my colleague on the 
financial aspects of your retirement plan, and now you are wanting to look at a plan for your time and 
activities, in short, your Retirement Life. The process will inclu de some work together engaging both you 
and me, some work on your own, thinking about some specific elements, some conversations with your 
spouse and some research on your part. I commit to following through on everything I commit to do in 
our meetings, an d in return need you to commit to following through on what you promise to do. We will 
likely meet 4 to 5 times for about an hour each time. Does this sound like a process that will work for you 
John, and that you can commit to?"  
Client/John:  "It sounds like it will be a lot of work, but I like the idea that we will be working on the other 
important half of my retirement plan. I really want to work on designing a retirement life that is 
meaningful, satisfying and fun for both my pa rtner and me. Yes, I believe this is just what I am looking 
for." 
Transition Structuring Skills  
A transition is a powerful conversation and interview structuring tool. A transition is used to move from 
one area of focus to another; you may use a transition to make this shift of focus evident to your client. 
Transitions also serve three other major fu nctions:  
i. They help to keep the focus of the interview sharp  
ii. They help prevent repetitive cycles  
iii. Help to keep the interview moving forward.  
A transition typically has two principle components: A statement of the previous area of discussion, 
followed by a statement of the next area for work. Transitions essentially tell your client, "This is where 
we’ve been, and this is where we are going next ." 
There are two cautions that need to be issued with respect to the use of transitions. First, you must ensure 
that the current area of discussion is fully covered before moving on to the next. Always ask one more 
question than you think necessary. A redunda nt answer will indicate that the area has been sufficiently 
covered. The second caution pertains to the way the transition is presented. To be effective, they must be 
smooth; a tie in from one area to the next is done in a natural rather than an abrupt way . The sequence of 
skills used immediately before and after a transition typically determine how "smooth" it was. The most 
effective routine is to reflect the last client content, check for accuracy, summarize the area being 
discussed, state the transition,  and follow with an open question.  
RRC/CR®: "We have been talking about the vision you have for your preferred retirement life. We have 
talked about your relationships, the location you see yourself in, activities you will do and some other 
lifestyle ideas. What else would you like to add?"  
Client:  "I think we have covered it all for today, I know I have some thinking to do but I can’t think of 
anything else to add."  
RRC/CR®: "Excellent, our next step will be to explore some of the supportive people in your life that can 
help you or encourage you in achieving your preferred retirement life. Who are some people who are 
closest to you that will support you in moving to your pre ferred future?"  
Client:  "Well, there is my son and daughter -in-law, they are in the process of taking over the business and 
should be ready by then. My friend Joe is great! He is always ready to chat or lend a hand, and then there 
is …"  
Planning for a Client's Well -being  
You may be asking yourself "What do I need to include in a FULL Retirement Plan for my clients?".  
Which came first - the chicken or the egg? Or, in our context - which comes first the Financial Planning 
or the Life Planning? Does it matter where we start the planning process with our clients? The author of 
the best -selling book "What Color is Your Para chute for Retirement", John E Nelson says "Retirement 
planning and education programs provide tools and checklists for a successful financial transition. But 
financial security doesn’t automatically create happiness in retirement. The universal dream is pr osperity, 
health and happiness - otherwise known as well -being". He goes on to state that well -being includes the 
Financial component as well as considering Geography, Medical, Psychological, Social and Biological 
needs.  
  
 
  
Have you ever wondered just how to open the conversation with your clients about their retirement plans? 
Is it too personal to ask? What if they are sad or angry? How do you deal with these messy emotions?  

An initial suggestion - explore the  Canadian Institute of Financial Planning (CIFP) Retirement 
Institute  web site. ( www.retirementinstitute.ca ) This is an excellent starting point and has great 
information and practical resources for you. It hosts the "Six Step Retirement Planning Process" – an 
excellent guide. [It can be found under the "What an RRC® /CR® Holder Can Do for You" 
tab: https://www.retirementinstitute.ca/WebPage.aspx?ID=350&SID=2  
In Step 4: Identify Appropriate Strategies and Present Retirement Plan  it states "Recommended strategies 
should also consider qualitative lifestyle considerations. For example, retirees should be made aware of 
how changes in a person's personal situation c an have an impact on their lifestyle when they stop 
working, such as, someone who retires from a physically active job should consider thinking of ways to 
remain active to avoid health issues. The RRC/CR may encourage and assist the client to prepare for t he 
emotional transition the client may experience.  
Part of the RRC/CR® role is to build bridges and links to Financial Applications of Life Planning 
components. What are the financial implications, adaptations, options to be considered to customize the 
Financial Plan to the client’s vision of their Retirement Life.  
A rule of thumb is to plan for 70% of income at age 65, is just a rule of thumb. The challenge is to get the 
2 numbers (how much do I need and for what) in a personal way for clients. A client is much more likely 
to act when both Lifestyle and Finances are  clear. This moves from a Transactional relationship to a 
Relational relationship and enhances the level of engagement as the two levels of planning merge into 
one. 
It is also important to include spouses and or partners and possibly other family members, which can add 
a level of complexity. A plan would start with the individual, then include the spouse or partner and then 
possibly the family. This means there may be  elements that require outside professionals in your planning 
and consideration such as lawyers, bankers, insurance specialists, psychologists, mediators etc.  
When your client asks you "How much do I need to save for retirement?" the conversation opener should 
be "Great question! Let’s start by thinking about and talking about some of the activities, needs and 
preferences you have for this next phase of your lif e. We need to talk about both time and money in order 
to answer that question."  
Creating A Retirement Life Vision  
We will be exploring some specific tools that can assist in the planning process and conversations with 
clients. It is purposefully written in most sections as if the client is being engaged in the conversation, 
rather than as instructions for you as the R RC/CR®. However, there are still some suggestions and 
instructions for good practise directed specifically to you, too.  
Learning Objectives  
• Specific Tools for exploring the future  
• Developing a client Retirement Life Plan  
• Learn specific life plan tools  
• Learning  to help clients develop a vision for their future  
• Learn to help clients develop achievable goals and plans  
• Retirement Life Planning Conversations and Personality Cues  
• Once you have assisted your client to think about and create their Retirement Life Vision, then 
you are both ready to move on to more in -depth Retirement Life Planning. This Unit covers other 
significant components/elements that may be needed by your clients depending on the stage and 
age. 
• Again, this is purposefully written in most cases as if your client is being engaged in the 
conversation, rather than as instructions for you as the RRC/CR®. However, there are still some 
suggestions and instructions for good practise directed specifically to you, too.  
• In the previous Unit you were introduced to the Personality Types as described by Mary Micisin 
in her work both on -line and in the book Personality Lingo. You will find in each section prompts 
for using the information or expected responses from the Mover,  Thinker, Planner, and Connector. 
Understanding client personalities and how they view the world and respond to information will 
allow your client and you to customize and support retirement life planning that is well suited to 
their personal and financial  needs.  
• Values  
• Our values are the things that we believe are important in the way we live our life and interact 
with the world around us. They determine our priorities and deep down are the guide we use to 
measure if our life is turning out the way we hoped it would. Val ues are our principles and/or 
standards of behaviour. Our moral code, our code of behaviour or our personal code of ethics. We 
all have values and these values can change over time as we enter and exit various phases of life. 
Our values influence our behav iours and our behaviours can change as we enter and exit various 
phases of our life.  
• It is very common for ones’ personal values to be quite different as we move toward planning our 
retirement life. Retirement is different from raising children, being in school or engaging in the 
competitive work place. An exercise for your client to consi der is the following:  
• Gather 3 colored markers or pens – a green, yellow and red. Review the words or phrases in the 
table below. With the  Green marker, indicate the values that youOFTEN or ALWAYSvalue. With 
the Redmarker indicate the values that youSELDOM  or NEVERvalue. With the  Yellow marker 
indicate the values that youSOMETIMES  value. The challenge is to get the list of  ALWAYS or 
OFTEN  value words or statements down to a list of 10 values. This list of 10 values will likely be 
reflective of your core values going ahead into your retire ment life. The core is who you are now, 
on the inside. This sets the stage for all other life plan elements.  
Diversity  Environment  Supervision  Spirituality  Help Society  Community  
Public 
Contact  Profit, Gain  Change and 
Variety  Work Alone  Excitement  Precision 
Work  
Power and 
Authority  Location  High 
Earnings 
Anticipated  Physical 
Challenge  Knowledge  Fast Pace  
Competition  Time Freedom  Affiliation  Recognition  Work With 
Others  Work on the 
Frontiers of 
Knowledge  
Practicality  Advancement  Fun and 
Humour  Exercise 
Competence  Creativity  Adventure  
Friendship  Stability  Security  Work -Life 
Balance  Job Tranquility  Moral 
Fulfillment  
Creative 
Expression  Honesty and 
Integrity  Family  Intellectual 
Status  Work Under 
Pressure  Challenging 
Problems  
Steep 
Learning 
Curve  Help Others  Personal 
Safety  Tradition  Group & Team  Structure and 
Predictability  
Aesthetics  Artistic 
Creativity  Status  Make 
Decisions  Independence  Influence 
People  
Psychological Strength  
Discovering one’s Psychological Strengths can seem a little like personality strengths. The key difference 
is that part of a personality is inherited whereas psychological strengths are primarily our choice. These 
strengths are often aligned with happiness , vitality and joy. What is true happiness and why do we seek it?  
According to Psychology Today, happiness is: More than simply positive mood, happiness is a state of 
well-being that encompasses living a good life —that is, with a sense of meaning and deep satisfaction. It 
is not an offshoot of joy but rather a result of time, discomfort and our way of expressing and thinking 
about our feelings.  
How can we choose to be happy? It has been said that the only thing in our lives we do have control over 
is our attitude. We can choose how we respond to life events. Imagine you are out for a lovely Sunday 
drive. It’s sunny, the weather is great, and some  super tunes are playing. In your exuberance you exceed 
the posted speed -limit and suddenly you notice the flashing red and blue lights in your rear -view mirror. 
Time for you to make a choice of which emotion you are going to experience. Do you choose ange r? 
"Darn it! I got caught. It’s not fair, other people are speeding, and they didn’t get caught. Don’t the police 
have better things to do than hassle me on a Sunday afternoon? This is going to completely ruin my day 
… grumble, grumble, grumble."  
Or, do you choose another emotion? Balance – "Oops, looks like I got caught. I don’t really want the 
ticket, but I am glad that the officers are out here keeping the roads safe. Guess I better slow down and 
enjoy the scenery!" The key message is, the choic e of response is yours. We can choose our responses – 
other people cannot drive our responses —that comes from within. Do you get angry when someone cuts 
you off in traffic? Or, do you give a friendly wave (with all the fingers) and graciously let them in f ront of 
you? Your choice. We share the planet with several billion other people, so we don’t always have things 
go the way we would prefer. Do you choose anger? Or do you choose to accommodate the differences 
and take a balanced response.  
Vitality:  the word vitality is derived from the Latin word vita which means life. Vitality is your life force 
and your ability to live or exist. Your vitality is influenced by your nutritional choices, your health, your 
social engagement and attitude towar d your current life stage. To a large extent an individual can 
influence their personal vitality. We hear the messages on Social Media, traditional media and from our 
doctors – diet and exercise can make a difference. Nutritional choices, limit sweets and alcohol, eat more 
plants, get moving, sitting is the new smoking – all these messages and more are flooding our senses and 
encouraging us to retain or regain our vitality. Watch what you eat, keep moving and stay socially 
engaged to stay vital as we age.  
Joy: This is the emotional culmination of happiness and vitality. If you research the synonyms for joy you 
will find words like delight, ecstasy, rapture, bliss … all descriptors of the indefinable emotional 
something that we strive for and recognise when we experience it.  
Strengths are always positive. Most people do know their strengths although they may be so comfortable, 
they have forgotten them.  
Invite your clients to check to see what attitude they are bringing to their life choices. Were they perhaps 
raised in a negative environment? Is this what they expect of life? Encourage them to practise being 
positive and looking on the bright side of lif e. If they were raised in a positive environment … celebrate it 
and pass on the positivity.  
How does this translate to individual personalities?  
Mover:  Their basic desire is to be in motion and to have fun! You may hear them saying "Are we having 
fun yet?" They desire to be engaged, social and active which are the elements that support their 
psychological strengths.  
Thinker:  Their basic need is to be in control – primarily of themselves and secondarily their environment. 
Being able to make decisions for themselves about all life elements is very important. When health or 
safety concerns force them into a different env ironment, it can be a success if they are allowed input into 
the choices of environment. They do not necessarily need to be in control of everything for psychological 
well-being, but certainly some elements need to be under their care and control.  
Planner:  Their basic need is to have everything perfect with minimal or no changes. They need peace and 
perfection and an environment that allows them to plan. They have a strong need for order which only 
becomes a stronger need with aging. Moving from one  home to another can be very traumatic, but this 
can be made easier to manage with lots of pre -planning that they are involved with. It is often said that 
psychological well -being is more difficult for this group as life seldom is perfect and orderly.  
Connector:  Their basic need is to have peace and harmony and relationships. They need to be around 
people and have good friends and family as part of their life. Caring relationships, no family drama and a 
quiet and peaceful environment are the keys to the ir psychological well -being. Any environment will 
work so long as it is peaceful and has access to people, including friends and family.  
Physical Vitality  
The following are some suggestions of questions to ask your clients:  
• What is your current state of health?  
• Have you been generally healthy or, have some aches and pains and medical conditions crept up 
on you?  
• It is said that sitting is the new smoking. Have you spent your career at a desk?  
• How are your knees? Hips? Back?  
• What state of health are you taking into your next life phase?  
Even if an individual has been sedentary most of their life, it is never too late to start moving! The field of 
Functional Nutrition has been creating and sharing a record amount of nutritional and life style 
information to assist people to eat and move to ward maintaining or increasing health and physical vitality. 
Many of us have seen the YouTube videos or pictures on the internet of very senior people demonstrating 
amazing feats of strength and endurance. An 80 -year-old body builder, a 100 -year-old skydiver, climbing 
mountains and finishing high level hikes and wal king programs in their 70’s, 80’s and beyond. Hats off to 
these remarkable individuals! Most people do not have the desire, the discipline or the drive to reach these 
milestones. They just want to feel good, have minimal aches and pains, be healthy and abl e to be active. 
Lifestyle and dietary choices certainly do contribute to physical vitality or lack thereof. Humans were 
meant to move, so move. Our nutritional choices are very broad now, it is tempting to "treat "ourselves 
too often, but that can lead to health challenges.  
• What is the general state of health in your family?  
• Do you have a parent or grandparent that had heart issues?  
• Was it due to lifestyle choices or possibly an inherited condition?  
There are most definitely health trends and inherited conditions that can greatly affect physical health and 
vitality. For example, an inherited condition like Huntington’s Disease, although there is great research 
and wonderful emerging therapies coming o n stream, is not currently managed through lifestyle choices.  
• Are there medical issues that are common in your family?  
• Is there a tendency to Type 2 Diabetes?  
• What about high blood pressure? Obesity?  
Suggest your clients have a conversation with their medical professionals to see if there are lifestyle 
choices that can be made that will improve these conditions. Frequently a regime of walking or movement 
and moderation or dietary changes will be sugges ted. 
Physical vitality is largely within the control of each individual and their lifestyle choices, with inherited 
conditions being the exception. Physical vitality is important as many other life satisfactions are driven by 
this element. A pain filled life, o r chronic exhaustion, or other manageable conditions makes it hard to be 
happy, to be engaged, to have fun, to travel, to be part of life.  
How does this translate to individual personalities?  
Mover:  These people have been high energy often very physically involved throughout their lives. It isn’t 
a surprise that they may have old injuries to knees, hips, hands, tendons, ligaments etc. that make them 
need to slow down. This can cause frustration  that is only alleviated by finding a new, body friendly 
activity. Physical vitality is important to them and they work towards it in a fun and adventuresome way. 
They love variety in their diet, enjoy diverse foods and readily follow food trends, happily moving on to 
each new one as it emerges. You may hear them say that they don’t have time to go to a doctor!  
Thinker:  These people have always taken a very rational approach to life and challenges. They have a 
voracious appetite for information and listen respectfully and then go and do their own research. They 
like to master things and often prefer to do difficu lt activities. They like to master the mountain, conquer 
the difficult hike, explore and learn about uncharted territories. This group is most often strongly self -
governing in diet and lifestyle choices. They will research and incorporate what they believe  to be the best 
activity and diet preferences into their life.  
Planner:  This group likes to follow rules and detailed protocols that have been created by others. Most 
often they are most comfortable with traditional medical approaches and value the relationship with their 
long time medical practitioners. They are ofte n very knowledgeable and thorough with any health 
concerns or family medical concerns and act on symptoms quickly.  
Connector: These folks cherish relationships with medical professionals both traditional and alternative. 
Many report that they enjoy massage therapy and visualization relaxation, yoga and other low key health 
practises. Because Connectors tend to be the m ost low -key individuals they need to be encouraged to 
move through walks and other activities. They especially enjoy group activities and love the idea of going 
on a health retreat. They are wonderful caretakers of others but can be neglectful of themselve s. 
Medical Philosophy  
Here are some prompts for your client conversations to help them to determine their medical philosophy, 
or, what they believe about medical care for themselves.  
What are your beliefs regarding how to maintain good health, manage health challenges and treat medical 
issues you may face either now or in the future? The web sitehttp://www.md -health.com/types -of-
doctors.htmllists 53 main types of doctors and specialty areas.  
Are you needing a specialist either now or possibly in the future? In addition to our standard Western 
medical care there are many therapies, modalities, methods and beliefs some people choose. For example, 
in addition to visiting your family doctor choice s of care can include: Homeopathy, Naturopathy, 
Ayurveda, Traditional Chinese Medicine, Acupuncture, Dietary Therapy, Chiropractic, Massage, 
Meditation, Yoga and others.  
Regardless of how you wish to maintain your health, there are some considerations.  
First, do you live in an area where your choice of medical care can be accessed easily? As one ages, the 
necessity of travelling for several hours to attend appointments becomes less attractive and often more 
difficult.  
Second, if your choice is reasonably accessible, do you have a good relationship with your practitioner? 
Are they someone you are comfortable receiving care from, and perhaps … are they unlikely to retire 
before your need for their services ends? Will your  medical choices require financial considerations?  
What about long -term care or critical care planning? The planning requires location, provider, medical 
and financial planning.  
Aging does change our bodies and therefore can change our medical needs. It is important to consider 
both current and future medical needs.  
Nearly all doctors and alternative health practitioners agree that diet and exercise are the foundation to 
achieving and maintaining good health at any age. Regardless of your medical beliefs, eating well and in 
moderation, moving and staying as active as possible will be areas you can control to contribute to your 
health.  
Mover:  It isn’t unusual to find Movers exploring a variety of emerging or new health trends and ideas. 
The latest diet, alternative therapies and what is trendy. They easily move on from one to another. They 
have no hesitation in combining traditional and alternative practices and would readily travel to find the 
care they are needing or wanting, rather than moving to a location where it is more easily accessible.  
Planner:  Taking a very thoughtful and well researched approach to their care for the future, a Planner will 
frequently give very serious consideration to the aspect of access to their care of choice. Naturally frugal 
and thrifty their preferred treatment w ill most often be covered by insurance so there is little to no out of 
pocket expense. It is not unusual to find them somewhat sceptical of holistic or alternative treatment 
protocols and prefer to use the "tried and true" conventional medical approaches.  
Thinker: A Thinker is a researcher. They want to explore and study all the medical avenues open to them. 
They will take all their research findings (including "Dr. Google") with them to their doctor appointment 
and want to know the doctor’s opinions and th oughts. They will give a reasoned consideration of 
exploring alternative ways of being healthy and prefer to as much as possible be in control of their health 
and wellbeing. They will choose to manage their diet and exercise to maintain or improve their health and 
vitality.  
Connector:  The relationship with their doctor and other health care supporter is of paramount 
consideration to a Connector. Once a relationship is established they find it difficult to change or move to 
another provider or clinic. Of all the personality st yles a Connector is most likely to be sedentary and 
require support to be active and to eat well. Relationships are paramount in every aspect of life planning 
for this group as they conserve their energies for important events.  
Geographical Location  
Client conversation starters for you to discuss geographical location with your client.  
Where on earth do you want to live in your next life phase? Are you planning on continuing to live in 
your current community? Maybe move back to the area where you grew up or move to be closer to 
children, grandchildren or other family members. Are you loo king to move to another country? To a 
kinder climate? Be a "Snow -bird"?  
Beyond geography, what type of housing would you prefer? Family home? Condo? Over 55 self -
contained community neighbourhood? Can you age in place?  
There are many examples of people who stayed in the same place as they aged, long after they should 
have moved. There are as many examples of people who couldn’t wait to relocate in retirement, moved 
and were disappointed. What are some of the consideratio ns people ought to be exploring?  
Geography and finances are closely linked. Beyond just the price of a home, condo, apartment or 
residence one must consider the overall cost of living. Transportation, food, utilities, entertainment and 
taxes are some of the cost considerations. Is a small  town versus a city more financially and 
geographically attractive? Does the proposed location have all the services one expects to need in the 
future, including accessible medical services?  
Geography can affect your health and wellbeing also. For example, we need social relationships. Does the 
location give the ability to maintain existing relationships? Or, to build and establish new relationships? Is 
it close to or accessible to family or e xtended family? Another element to explore is healthy living habits. 
Can you be physically active? Can you engage in your hobbies or interests?  
It is fine to fall in love with an area, a region or a country but the geography must be measured against 
finances, happiness and healthy living.  
John E. Nelson in his book "What Color is Your Parachute – For Retirement" describes what he calls 
"your essential region". This is a region that is not just nice to visit but one where you could happily live 
out your days. The region would contain element s that you would consider essential to a happy life. For 
example: your favorite sports team, a good airport, a big outlet mall, access to golf or the arts. He 
suggests 7 questions to ask yourself:  
i. Does the region support social interaction with your most important relationships?  
ii. Does the region allow you to use your skills or strengths?  
iii. Does the region allow you to pursue your interests or passions?  
iv. Does the region or climate support your health needs?  
v. Does the region allow you to make ends meet financially?  
vi. Does the region connect to your deepest values? (traditions, culture, religion, family)  
vii. Does the region support your chosen way to live in all aspects?  
It is important to remember that needs change over time and what works in the early phases of retirement 
may not work as well in later stages when more help and support may be required.  
How does this translate to individual personalities?  
Mover:  Is looking for the adventure of new surroundings, new people and new experiences. Does not 
always make the best geographical decisions for long term locations.  
Planner: Finds it very hard to relocate even if it is the best solution for health, safety and well -being. Can 
easily be overwhelmed by the information surrounding the geographical decision.  
Thinker:  Will look at both the near and long -term viability of the geographical decision. If it makes sense 
personally and financially to relocate will readily do so.  
Connector:  First asks about the people that are important to them. Will they be in close or closer 
proximity to family and friends? They fear being socially isolated and will readily move to be closer to 
family and friends.  
Social Engagement  
Decades of research at the University of Berkley California, suggest that the quality of our social ties 
might be the single biggest predictor of our well -being. If we cultivate healthy social engagement, the 
research promises a longer, happier, and more p rosperous life.  
Social connections are sometimes called "social capital" for good reason: they are a valuable resource in 
life, creating moments of positivity and fun, supporting us through good times and bad, and exposing us 
to new ideas and new people.  
"Resonant relationships are like emotional vitamins, sustaining us through tough times and nourishing us 
daily," writes Daniel Goleman in Social Intelligence: The New Science of Human Relationships.  
Here are some of the research -backed benefits of social connection:  
• Happiness:  People who are very happy tend to be highly social and have strong relationships.  
• Health:  Strong social ties keep our memory sharp and may even protect us from catching colds.  
• Be Positive:  Social interactions feel good. People report that the everyday activities involving the 
most positive emotions are sex and socializing.  
• Long Life:  There’s some evidence that having more supportive friendships and more cohesive 
family and community relationships could reduce the risk of fatal heart attacks.  
Not everyone moves through life with a wide range of friends and acquaintances or strong family ties. 
The good news is that it is seldom too late to work on developing a strong community of friends. One can 
join a community group, join a group that shares their hobby or interests, join a book club or travel group 
or bridge club, join an activity group or a faith organization. There really is a group for everyone! If your 
client can’t find one, maybe encourage them to start one and get engaged with people wh o share their 
interests, and beliefs.  
How does this translate to individual personalities?  
Mover:  Easily join groups but are also comfortable in moving on to their interest area. Often, they are 
most drawn to activities like travel, walking, yoga, exercise, dinner and cooking. They look for ways to 
engage in several of their interests at once, for example a walking tour of Tuscany with cooking lessons 
and evening social opportunities.  
Thinker:  Are not naturally joiners or group people. Often, they will find one or two individuals who share 
their cognitive interests and abilities. They are naturally attracted to opportunities to learn, explore and 
debate with intellectually competent pee rs. They may enjoy opportunities to listen to lectures in small 
groups where they can engage with the presenter to ask questions and debate the topic.  
Planner:  Do not enjoy most group opportunities as they don’t care for the degree of disorganization many 
groups experience. Like the thinkers, they are most attracted to small group experiences. They like quiet 
but intense hobbies such as coin collecting, entomology etc. where they can delve very deeply into a 
subject and immerse themselves for hours in a collection or topic either on their own or occasionally with 
a select few of equally minded people.  
Connector:  Love to be with other people. The more the merrier and prefer working toward helping others. 
Knitting groups, toy making groups, sewing circles and restoring appliances or autos for others are 
examples of their favorite type of group activity. W hat is important is the opportunity to interact with 
others and to work or contribute toward the common good. And if there is family involved, so much the 
better!  
Leaving a Legacy  
A conversation with your client about leaving a Legacy is a three -part conversation. Elements that you 
should cover include professional, personal and a reminder to care for their digital legacy as well.  
Professional legacy - Many people do not take the time to stop and think about the legacy or footprint 
they wish to leave at their workplace. For years they have invested 2000 hours or more in building a 
career or business, what memories will they leave be hind with their former workmates or employees?  
Mentorship is an excellent way of investing in the next generation and/or passing along the years of 
knowledge as well as the organization’s historical memory. If it isn’t somehow recorded or left behind it 
is lost.  As Terry Pratchett states, “If you do no t know where you come from, then you don't know where 
you are, and if you don't know where you are, then you don't know where you're going.”   Encourage 
people to write down the practises, their procedures, their processes, or just the right way to hold you r 
tongue so the gadget will work!  
Personal legacy  – Some families have treasures, mementos or trinkets that are special because they are 
reminders of previous generations. Some have great financial worth, others only emotional value, but 
whichever is the case a plan should be in place to e nsure they arrive in the right hands or destination. The 
plan should be written, or video recorded, the receiver should be notified, and the item should be clearly 
labeled (in an inconspicuous place of course) It is sad to see strife in families dealing wi th estate items 
and have a falling out over "stuff" when a clear plan could have prevented it. There are those who 
encourage giving the items away prior to disability or death to experience the new owner’s pleasure in the 
item. An excellent resource can be  the articles at  www.nextavenue.org  
Digital Legacy It is good to remind your client to ensure that they have taken the legal steps necessary to 
ensure that their on -line presence can be appropriately dealt with, ended or closed. This includes accounts 
like Facebook, Twitter, LinkedIn, Instag ram, on -line game sites and digital banking. Have you ever had a 
post pop -up from a friend that has passed away? It is very sad when that happens, doubly so because it is 
preventable by ensuring that the legality of closing accounts had been planned for an d that an individual 
has been specified as the person who will close the accounts.  
How does this translate to individual personalities?  
Mover:  Movers find it difficult to write down their procedures and pass them along. Often they take 
innovative and creative ways of working or problem solving. They work best doing personal mentoring or 
taking someone under their wing to show them how it i s done. They appreciate family treasures and know 
the stories or adventures the item represents. They are a great candidate for a video as they display the 
item and tell the story around it.  
Thinker:  Are good at writing down their procedures and also have a formal mentorship plan to pass along 
their knowledge. The formal aspect is important as they want to know that the mentee is "getting it". 
Family treasures and artifacts are important if th ey have historical or financial significance. There is much 
less interest in frivolous or "bric -a-brac" items.  
Planner:  This group is seldom the initiator of processes but are exceptional at following protocols and 
rules. They excel at passing along the correct way to do everything and enjoy having a like -minded 
mentee to teach. Family treasures are very important to them. The longer the artifact has been in the 
family the more important it is to a Planner. As their descriptor implies, they like to carefully plan to leave 
a legacy and to leave treasures to the right people.  
They will write it down, label it and do their best to ensure everything goes to the correct new owner.  
Connector:  This group finds it difficult to leave their work friends behind and are often found to be the 
ones who organise lunches or get togethers with former colleagues. They readily share with others what 
they do and how they do it. Family treasures an d memories are very important. The photos, scrapbooks 
and mementoes are labeled and named as to their destination. It isn’t unusual for this group to give the 
item to the designated person in person. They love to see the joy and share the memories with the  
recipient.  
Giving Back  
There are many local, regional and international opportunities to volunteer and give back through time 
and talent.  
A quick Google or Yellow Pages search will identify some great opportunities. Many communities have a 
Volunteer coordination organization or department in the city administration that can provide local 
volunteer information.  
Some things to invite your client to consider are their interests, their skills, the time they have available to 
commit, their community network and others. Ask them - Do you like animals? To work with your hands? 
To serve others? To sew? Do you like books  and reading? Teaching? There is a community volunteer 
opportunity for everyone.  
Both short and long term international volunteering opportunities abound. A resource for starting the 
search could be  http://volunteerinternational.org/  or seek out personal areas of interest through a faith 
group, community organization (such as Rotary International or Habitat for Humanity). The 
website  http://volunteerabroad.org  also lists opportunities around the globe. The searching itself can be 
fascinating!  
How does this translate to individual personalities?  
Mover:  Looks for adventure opportunities or places where they can interact in a fun environment. The 
challenge of travel and volunteerism is attractive providing their health allows for it. Joining a senior’s 
demonstration dance group or working on home bu ilds is often attractive to them. With their diverse 
interests there are many opportunities to volunteer.  
Thinker:  The Thinkers enjoy researching opportunities through resources such as the Canadian 
government site for country or international opportunities.  http://international.gc.ca/world -
monde/issues_development -enjeux_developpement/involved -participer/index.aspx?lang=eng  and through 
the V olunteer Cooperation program. Some of the program areas are CESO – Canadian Executive Service 
Organization, Crossroads International, CUSO International, Engineers Without Borders (and most other 
professions without borders) and many othe rs. 
Planner:  Similar to the Thinker group, Planners like to work with organizations that have a success record 
and are organized to work with specific projects or countries. (see references above) They believe 
strongly in giving back through time and resources  to their community and organizations. Although they 
are not natural group joiners they willingly volunteer when asked or encouraged by a friend or family 
member.  
Connector:  Members of this group are the natural volunteers and love to be able to help, to serve and to 
make a difference. They readily support projects and are good at finding areas of need or service gaps and 
finding ways of helping. They eagerly respon d to calls for assistance near and far and are wonderful at 
gathering their friends to help them out.  
Learning and Brain Engagement  
Elderhostel was a non -profit organization that was founded in 1975 with the mission of providing lifelong 
learning for North Americans in the fifty plus age group through travel. Now rebranded as Roads Scholar 
(www.roadscholar.org ) they have been providing travel and learning opportunities to thousands of 
engaged explorers from ages 50 – 95, with travel to every continent and access to experts, experiences 
and small group travel. Topics are extremely varied and can be sorted by dat e, location, activity level, 
duration, interest (science and nature, art history and museums, walking and hiking, Jewish studies, train 
trips, small ships and more) and group make -up (i.e.: singles, Grandparents) Part of this planning does 
requirefinancial  consideration.  
Perhaps learning and travel together are not what an individual is seeking. Many Universities have free 
tuition for learners over age 65, a great way to explore topics and learn new things. Community Colleges 
often offer evening programs for topical learni ng and of course the on -line learning world is virtually 
unlimited. From topical learning to achieving a degree from the comfort of home, the World Wide Web 
has introduced learning opportunities on an unprecedented scale. Some of the many resources availab le 
include:  www.udemy.com  , www.lynda.com  , LinkedIn Learning, and of course – the "University of 
YouTube" and Google!  
Research from many sources and disciplines are showing that one of the preferred ways to stop or slow 
cognitive decline is to keep the brain engaged. There are many ways to stay or start being cognitively 
engaged and learning something new is a preferred w ay for many.  
Engaging in crossword puzzles, Sudoku puzzles and word searches are also great ways to keep your brain 
fit. Once again, technology has come to our rescue and there are more than pen and paper version of these 
puzzles and games. Just do an "App" search and there is a plethora of free and paid games and puzzles 
available. Did you know that there are even electronic "jig -saw" puzzles? Highly portable! One does not 
have to be a knowledge junkie to keep the brain fit and healthy.  
How does this translate to individual personalities?  
Mover:  Loves to learn and experience new things but does not often go in depth. They prefer to keep the 
excitement alive through the new experiences. If possible physically and financially they love to travel, 
explore, discover and learn with other highly motivated individuals.  
Thinker:  Loves to travel and learn and are especially enamoured of the on -line learning opportunities. 
They appreciate that they can learn at will, conveniently and as set by their schedule. Often have no 
difficulty in keeping mentally fit and challenged a s they readily will learn on their own.  
Planner:  Love guided trips with a set itinerary and knowledgeable guides and travel companions. A small 
group tour or a museum or the Vatican is their idea of perfection. Electronic learning is acceptable, but 
they are most attracted to free University in class learning. The best of all worlds for them!  
Connector:  Really enjoy learning in groups and especially with a cohort of friends. Taking up golf or 
"Pickleball" is fun with friends. Learning to knit or do woodworking is fun with friends. Reading novels 
and then being able to talk about the characters and story in a group is a great experience. Connectors are 
less likely to engage in formal courses or higher -level learning but do like to keep cognitively engaged 
through relating and experiencing with others.  
Review  
It matters not whether retirement planning starts with money or time, what matters is that both are 
considered. It may not be easy to initiate the conversations with your clients but a handout or information 
in an email prior to the appointment might make it easier to have an open discussion.  
This unit has covered some specific tools you can use to engage your clients in thinking and talking about 
how they would prefer their future to unfold. These five tools can be used individually or as a suite of 
tools depending on what your client needs to  plan for envisioning their future. These tools can and should 
be shared with spouses and partners and other family and friends who are important to your client.  
There is no question that clients planning for their successful and fulfilling retirement years must consider 
their financial plan. The finances contribute to some of the life management decisions.  
Equally, consideration must be given to the life requirements when a financial plan is being prepared and 
executed. Time and money go hand -in-hand.  
This unit also explored eleven areas of Life Planning Conversations. Some of your clients may be ahead 
of you and have given these areas consideration, but many will not have looked at all these areas. Each 
section also gave you hints for each Personality Type and what they may do or how they may respond. 
Each person is a unique individual who will bring their individual self to the planning session. As you 
become more familiar with these tools and other tools you may discover, you will find your unique 
planning and conversation style that is going to serve you well as you engage in the full spectrum of 
retirement planning with your clients.  
By exploring and planning with a client for all aspects of their life in the future an RRC/CR®, with these 
tools can provide excellent service, support and success for your clients.  
Client Engagement Skills  
Welcome to Client Engagement Skills. In this lesson, you will learn about soft skills, why they are so 
important in developing and maintaining client -planner relationships and techniques that will enable a 
planner to improve his or her soft skills. This le sson will also look at the various life stages and to what 
extent retirement planning fits into each stage. Finally, how a client will define his or her retirement 
vision and retirement goals will be explored.  
At the end of this lesson, you will be able to do the following:  
• distinguish between soft skills and hard skills  
• understand the importance of two particular soft skills: effective listening and effective 
questioning  
• describe the format of a typical client meeting  
• describe how soft skills can be used to address client objections  
• identify the different stages of life planning and the main characteristics of each stage  
• define lifestyle retirement planning  
• describe the topics covered as part of uncovering a client's retirement vision and goals  
What are Soft Skills?  
Whether or not we are aware of it, living in a civilized society, we all possess soft skills albeit, to varying 
degrees. In large part, soft skills are social skills that are intangible but nevertheless, integral in effectively 
dealing with family and frie nds, co -workers, existing and potential business partners and clients and even 
with complete strangers. Your ability and willingness to help others, to work in a team environment, to 
solve problems and to communicate effectively are just a few examples of the many different components 
that make up the skill set known as soft skills. Soft skills reflect your ability to empathize, to listen and 
ultimately, to earn the trust and respect of your clients.  
As a financial planner, the importance of soft skills in attracting and perhaps, more importantly, retaining 
clients is often understated particularly, when compared to the more tangible requirement for  hard 
skills  such as product knowledge, educational proficiencies and technical skills. Without minimizing the 
importance of hard skills —clearly, a planner must be technically competent —the reality is that it is the 
soft skills demonstrated by the planner that builds a trusting, enduring relationship with his or her client. 
An advisor who has strong soft skills will utilize them such that it appears to be natural and genuine and 
will have the ability to adroitly look for clues such as reading a client's body language a nd listening 
carefully to what is being said so that it can lead the advisor to ask appropriate questions.  
The significance of soft skills is akin to the bedside manner of a doctor. Two doctors may have an equally 
high degree of proficiency and technical skills to treat a given ailment. However, beyond his or her actual 
competence, wouldn't you rather be treate d by a doctor that demonstrates compassion, empathy and 
respect, who can eliminate your anxiety and fear and restore calm and peace of mind by simplifying 
complicated medical concepts into layman's terms? As a patient, wouldn't you want your doctor to list en 
and directly address your concerns and to take the steps necessary to ensure you have a clear 
understanding of your circumstances and the implications of the proposed treatment? Clearly, the doctor 
who is compassionate and who has highly developed commu nication skills will be the doctor who is 
going to be more effective and who will have the better relationship with his or her patient. The argument 
has also been made that a doctor with a good bedside manner significantly aids the recovery of his or her 
patient.  
Soft skills are also distinct from hard skills in that hard skills must be learned. For example, a planner 
does not have an innate understanding of the details relating to a given investment product or a tax 
concept. Rather, this knowledge can only be gain ed through proactive learning and experience. In 
contrast, soft skills tend to be more intuitive based on societal norms and accepted social practices. This 
being said, as we are all aware, the soft skills of some individuals are considerably better than t he soft 
skills possessed by other individuals. The good news is that where we may be lacking, techniques can be 
learned to improve and expand on the basic soft skills we all possess.  
The most effective financial advisor is one who follows the financial planning process using his or her 
fundamentally sound hard skills in conjunction with a highly developed suite of soft skills. Soft skills can 
be categorized as follows:  
Type of Skill  Required Soft Skills  
communication skills  • listening  
• questioning  
• probing  
• clear presentation  
client and co -worker interaction skills  • attitude awareness  
• conflict handling  
• co-operation  
• diversity tolerance  
• teamwork  
• willingness to help  
• taking and understanding direction  
• supervision  
• problem solving  
self-management skills  • decision making  
• willingness to learn  
• time management  
• self-discipline  
• stress management  
 
Effective Listening  
Of the six steps that are part of the retirement planning process, the second step —establishing client 
objectives and gathering data —is paramount. After all, it is during this stage of the process that the 
planner will uncover the client's retirement objec tives and set into motion a roadmap to optimize financial 
security for the client in retirement.  
During the course of the discovery meetings with a client, rarely will he or she, on her own, offer all of 
the necessary information in sufficient detail to allow a planner to formulate a retirement plan. So, it is 
during the second step of the retirement planning process the two most important soft skills possessed by 
a planner come into sharp focus: listening skills and asking effective questions.  
The value of listening  
In a typical client -planner relationship, the planner is viewed as the expert while the client is relegated to 
the position of being dependant on the advice dispensed by the planner. On the surface, the dynamic of 
this relationship would lead one to think that a client -planner meeting would predominantly be a one -way 
conversation with the planner doing the talking and the client doing the listening.  
Paradoxically, the most effective meeting between a financial advisor and his or her client would actually 
be the reverse scenario: the client should do the majority of the talking while the planner listens 
attentively. Upon further reflection, this actually makes perfect sense. The role of the planner is to 
formulate strategies and to assist his or her client in making the best possible financial decisions. 
However, being able to do this is predicated on lea rning the details of a client's financial situation and 
identifying the client's goals and objectives. This can only be achieved if, during the early stages of the 
financial process, the advisor is  listening  to the client more so than talking to the client.  
Listening Techniques  
If we accept that listening is one of the most important soft skills a financial advisor can possess, what 
techniques can be employed to ensure you are maximizing your listening skills?  
Whether it is your spouse, your child, your friends, your boss or, more relevant to your role as a financial 
planner, your client, listening attentively can sometimes be challenging. Moreover, our natural tendencies 
suggest that it is far easier for most o f us to talk than it is to listen. In the midst of a conversation, how 
often have we found ourselves thinking forward to how we are going to reply to the other person, rather 
than focusing on what is being said? Similarly, how often do we think we know wha t the other person is 
going to say and end up interrupting them to complete their thought for them or if we are able to hear 
them out, do we really pay as much attention as we should?  
Listening attentively is a skill; it is also one of the biggest compliments and signs of respect you can give 
another person. The following list identifies techniques that will enable you to become a more effective 
listener:  
i. Stop talking:  It sounds easy and obvious but, as we all know, it is more difficult in practice. The 
bottom line: it is difficult to listen and speak at the same time.  
 
ii. Face the speaker:  Sit up straight or lean forward slightly to show your interest and that you are 
paying attention. Your body language shows the speaker whether or not he or she has your 
attention.  
 
iii. Maintain eye contact:  Eye contact with the speaker shows that you are focusing on what is being 
said. You must find a balance between too little eye contact and too much so, that you both 
remain comfortable.  
 
iv. Listen attentively:  Listen to what is being said without interrupting the speaker. Rather than 
thinking ahead to how you are going to reply, listen to what is being said to gather as much 
information as possible before you form your reply.  
 
v. Show patience:  Let the speaker finish his or her thoughts before you reply. Recognize that some 
people take longer or may have greater difficulty explaining what they mean or articulating their 
thoughts.  
 
vi. Pause before replying:  Wait a second or two after the speaker has finished his or her point. He or 
she may simply be taking a moment before continuing. By pausing, you will avoid interrupting 
the other person. If they have in fact finished speaking, a slig ht pause shows that you have 
listened carefully to what he or she has said.  
 
vii. Question for clarification:  If you are not a 100 per cent certain of what was said, never make 
assumptions. Asking open -ended questions like "Can you explain what you meant by…?" or 
"Why did you decide to do this rather than that?", you can gain the clarit y you require in addition 
to showing the speaker you have an interest in what he or she is saying.  
 
viii. Paraphrase what was said back to the speaker:  What better way to demonstrate to the speaker that 
you have been listening attentively than by being able to paraphrase what he or she said to you? A 
further benefit of paraphrasing is that it gives the speaker  the opportunity to offer more 
information and to clarify any misunderstandings.  
ix. Summary and Reflective Statements  
x. Summary and reflective statements are a byproduct of effective listening.  
xi. Summary statements  
xii. In a meeting, a planner should periodically inject a summary statement to summarize what he or 
she has heard the client say. This kind of statement ensures both the client and the planner have an 
understanding of what has been said (i.e. they are both on t he same page) and it zeros in on the 
facts because peripheral issues are filtered out. A summary statement is also useful to conclude 
the discussion on one topic and segue into the next topic.  
xiii. Example  So, what you are saying is that travel will rank as your highest priority during retirement 
and you anticipate each trip to cost approximately $2,500. Let's move on to your family 
situation…  
xiv. Reflective statements  
xv. A reflective statement is often very similar to a summary statement. For a planner, it involves 
paraphrasing what he or she has heard a client say and reflecting it back to the client. The use of 
reflective statements by a planner is a strong indicator to a client that the planner is listening and 
that the client is the sole focus of the planner's attention.  
xvi. Example  When you managed your own finances, you were frustrated because of the volume of 
information you had to juggle every time you reviewed your portfolio.  
xvii. Effective Questioning  
xviii. Asking the right type of question at the right time is a skill a planner must master in order to 
effectively elicit the vital information needed to construct a comprehensive retirement plan. 
Effective questioning involves the use of two types of questions:  open -ended questions and close -
ended questions.  
xix. Open -ended questions are used to encourage a client to speak freely and openly about his or her 
circumstances. The answers to these questions enable a planner to gather the pertinent data 
necessary to make recommendations later in the retirement planning p rocess. Once sufficient 
information has been gathered, the planner can employ a series of closed -ended questions to 
clarify the client's situation and to confirm the accuracy of the information that has been 
accumulated.  
 
Open -ended Questions  
The purpose of asking an open -ended question is to obtain information on how a client feels or his or her 
opinion or knowledge on a given topic. An open -ended question may begin with words or phrases like 
'what', 'where', 'how', 'describe', 'tell me about'  or 'how do you feel'. Given the nature of an open -ended 
question, the client cannot respond with a simple 'yes' or 'no'; rather, the client is encouraged to provide a 
longer and more substantial answer. This is the ultimate objective of the planner when h e or she poses 
such a question.  
An open -ended question transfers control of the conversation to the client and as such, it is perceived as a 
less threatening way to gather information and helps develop trust with the planner. In short, it allows the 
client to speak rather than being rele gated to the position of listening to the planner. Of course, there are 
various points during a discovery meeting where the planner must assume a more dominant position to 
ensure the meeting has direction and structure however, strategically interjecting m oments where the 
planner relinquishes control to the client —through the use of open -ended questions —will prove to be 
significantly more effective in gathering the required information.  
Characteristics of an open -ended question include:  
• They require the client to think about how he or she will respond to a planner's question.  
• Control of the conversation is temporarily given to the client.  
• The planner will receive insight into the thoughts of the client.  
• The planner may be able to elicit answers to more complex questions.  
Of course the potential drawback of an open -ended question is that sometimes the client may provide too 
much information, particularly if it is not relevant to his or her retirement. It is at this point that a planner 
with highly developed soft skills will  be able to politely and respectfully redirect his or her client to the 
topic at hand without making the client feel uncomfortable to the point he or she begins to withdraw and 
is no longer willing to share information.  
Examples of open -ended questions that may be used during a discovery meeting include:  
• Describe your experience the last time you met with a financial planner?  
• How have you managed your investments in the past?  
• Tell me about your plans for retirement?  
• How do you feel about investments that may fluctuate in value?  
• What do you see yourself doing during retirement?  
• What are your intentions with respect to inheritances and charitable bequests?  
Bearing in mind the purpose of step two of the retirement planning process is to acquire as much 
information about a client's situation and his or her goals as possible, it is easy to see how the use of open -
ended questions so easily lends itself to discov ery meetings with a client.  
Closed -ended Questions  
While an open -ended question requires a client to provide a longer more informative answer, the purpose 
of a closed -ended question is to obtain a quick, fixed response often, a simple 'yes' or a 'no'. A closed -
ended question typically starts with words lik e 'would', 'when', 'can', 'is there', 'do you', 'are' and 'if'.  
These types of questions are useful in confirming information that has been gathered from previously 
asked open -ended questions. They can also be useful when probing or leading the conversation in a 
specific direction. Understandably, in the early stages of a client -planner relationship, a client may shy 
away from elaborating on open -ended questions that are of a sensitive nature (e.g. medical information, if 
a spouse, common -law partner or family mem ber has an addiction problem, issues surrounding same -sex 
relationships). Ultimately, more detailed information on these topics will likely be necessary if a proper 
retirement plan is to be implemented however, during the initial meeting, the use of closed -ended 
questions to gather at least some superficial information is a start and allows the meeting to progress 
rather than getting bogged down on one point. When the client is more comfortable revealing information 
about themselves in future meetings, thes e areas can be readdressed using open -ended questions.  
Closed -ended questions must be used with care —if too many are asked in succession, the meeting may 
take on the feel of an interrogation rather than an informal discovery meeting. Obviously, this will make 
the client feel uncomfortable or threatened and wil l likely lead him or her to retreat as opposed to being 
more forthcoming with his or her answers.  
Characteristics of closed -ended questions include:  
• They are quickly and easily answered.  
• They lead to precise, factual answers.  
• The planner retains control of the conversation.  
• They discourage disclosure or supplemental information beyond the basic question that is being 
asked.  
Examples of closed -ended questions that may be asked during a client -planner meeting include:  
• When was the last time you reviewed your retirement plan?  
• Is there anything that you’re concerned about, when you think about retiring?  
• Do you know what your company pension plan will pay you at retirement?  
• Have you ever owned investments that may fluctuate in value?  
• Is it important for you to leave an inheritance or a charitable bequest?  
The use of open -and closed -ended questions in conjunction will allow a planner to gather the information 
necessary to prepare a retirement plan, to offer professional advice and to add value to his or her 
relationship while building trust with his or her c lient.  
Meeting with a Client  
A client meeting typically involves a variety of steps. At each step, a planner will be presented with an 
opportunity to utilize his or her soft skills to make a client feel comfortable disclosing his or her private 
affairs, to elicit as much useful inform ation from the client to construct a comprehensive retirement plan 
and to clarify and expand on information as necessary.  
A client meeting will generally be structured as follows:  
Opening  
The early stages of an initial meeting with a client centers on making the client feel as comfortable as 
possible. The meeting will likely start with general conversation that is not necessarily related to the 
client's financial affairs such as a topical n ews item (provided it is tasteful and not too controversial of 
course), something in which you or the client were involved (e.g. a recent vacation) or a common interest 
(e.g. last night's hockey game). This early banter amounts to the proverbial 'small tal k' however, if done 
with sincerity and genuine interest, it can prove to be an effective way to build rapport and to begin the 
process of lowering the barriers between the client and the planner.  
Most people have the capacity to engage in forgettable 'small talk' when they meet new people at a social 
function or some other event however, having a general conversation in such a way that it seems real and 
encourages the other person to open up is a d ifferent talent altogether —a planner would do well to 
sharpen this particular soft skill.  
The opening should also focus on obtaining agreement from the client on what should be accomplished 
during the course of the meeting. Proposing an agenda that clearly indicates what will be discussed will 
give the client a path to follow and it will also b e a touchstone throughout the meeting to help both parties 
stay on track. As the planner reviews the agenda with his or her client, it is important for the planner to 
state and restate the value and the benefit of each objective to the client. At every tur n, the client should 
know not just the process but, why each step in the process will contribute to the development of a 
retirement plan. Also of importance is for the planner to get acceptance from the client about each 
objective. Doing so not only shows respect and courtesy but, also makes the client an active participant in 
the process and makes it less likely that he or she will resist disclosing information about their 
circumstances.  
Questioning / Listening / Probing  
The middle stage of a client meeting is by far the most important. Using the meeting agenda as a guide, a 
planner will begin the process of gathering data and speaking to the client about his or her retirement 
vision and retirement goals. Depending on the complexity of the client's circumstances, it is unlikely that 
all the relevant information can be obtained during the course of a single meeting so, both client and 
planner should be prepared for questioning, listening and probing to take place over a seri es of meetings.  
This step involves asking the right combination of open - and closed -ended questions, listening attentively 
to the response of the client and following up the initial questions with further probing questions to get 
additional details or clarification. This is also a time where unexpected opportunities may arise as your 
client explains his or her circumstances (e.g. they are expecting a large inheritance, they are not happy 
with the returns generated by the other planner with whom they deal). As discussed ear lier, from a 
planner's perspective, listening is arguably more important than speaking.  
No other step of the retirement planning process will reveal to what degree a planner has developed his or 
her suite of soft skills. Plainly put: the better the planner is at effectively using the full range of his or her 
soft skills, the more open the cli ent will likely be to reveal the necessary information in the detail that is 
required.  
Supporting  
By this stage of the meeting, a planner should have a clear picture of his or her client needs and what the 
planner and his or her organization can do to satisfy those needs. At this time, a planner should summarize 
his or her client's requirements by para phrasing them and then describe the specific features and benefits 
of a product or service that will address the client's needs. This process of supporting the client confirms 
that you understand what the client requires and that you have a solution to off er. Again, it is important to 
ask the client for agreement and acceptance on each point and to answer any questions the client may 
have before moving to the next stage.  
Closing  
By the time a planner has reached the final stage of a meeting with a client, the client's situation has been 
discussed, his or her needs have been uncovered through open - and closed -ended questions and 
confirmation from the client has been obtained regard ing a course of action. The planner should again 
briefly review the benefits of the product or service accepted by the client. The planner should also 
congratulate the client for taking positive steps towards meeting his or her retirement goals. Finally, the 
planner should also offer to clarify any confu sion or answer any outstanding questions the client may 
have.  
Once this has been done, it is now time to agree on the next step whether that is opening a new account 
scheduling a follow -up meeting or some other event.  
It sounds obvious but, at the end of the meeting, the planner should thank the client for his or her time and 
the planner should personally escort the client from his or her office.  
Resolving Client Concerns  
Inevitably, during the course of meeting with a client, a planner will face objections. How a planner deals 
with these objections can go a long way in either solidifying or diminishing his or her credibility in the 
eyes of the client.  
It is often said —with good reason —that client objections should be viewed as an opportunity rather than 
an obstacle and that objections should be welcomed and not discouraged. When a client voices his or her 
concern on an issue, it gives the planner a chan ce to clarify and to explain. It also indicates that the client 
is engaged in the meeting and is interested —he or she simply needs to have their questions adequately 
answered before they feel comfortable moving to the next stage. From a planner's perspecti ve, it is 
important to view a client objection not necessarily as an outright rejection of the planner or his or her 
ideas but rather, as an opportunity for the planner to expound and to provide greater clarity on a concept 
and to restate its features and benefits.  
Handling client objections  
First and foremost, when an objection is raised, the planner should acknowledge his or her client's 
concern. From there, it is critical the planner address the objection head -on rather than side -stepping the 
issue or ignoring the client altogether. At wors t, if the planner is unable to provide an answer immediately, 
he or she should acknowledge this and then advise the client that further research is required to provide a 
suitable response. Most clients recognize that expecting a planner to have extemporane ous answers to 
every question is unreasonable so, they will be amenable to a minor delay. Where a client will be less 
tolerant is if the only response a planner offers is to evade questions or challenges.  
Common client objections and how a planner might overcome them are detailed in the following table.  
Client Objection  Planner's Course of Action / Resolution  
client is happy with his or her current situation and 
does not want to change or is indifferent to a 
proposed idea  • acknowledge the client's point of view  
• request permission to probe  
• probe to raise awareness regarding client's 
need to change  
• explore the client's circumstances for 
opportunities  
• confirm the existence of a need  
• reiterate the features and benefits of the 
proposed resolution  
client is skeptical  • acknowledge the concern  
• probe to understand the cause of the client's 
skepticism  
• offer relevant resolution  
• reiterate the features and benefits of the 
proposed resolution  
• check for acceptance from the client  
client has a misunderstanding  • acknowledge the client's perception  
• probe to get further details on the client's 
understanding of things  
• clarify the client's misunderstanding  
• check for acceptance from the client and 
that the client is fully satisfied with the 
explanation  
client does not like a particular feature of a product 
or of the proposed retirement plan  • acknowledge the client's point of view  
• request permission to probe  
• probe to get a deeper understanding of what 
exactly the client is dissatisfied with  
• offer relevant resolution such as an alternate 
product or amending the plan  
• reiterate the features and benefits of the 
proposed resolution  
• check for acceptance from the client and 
that the client is fully satisfied with the 
explanation  
 
Sample Client -Planner Dialogue  
Having learned about soft skills and their value during client -planner interactions, the following dialogue 
incorporates the concepts presented throughout this lesson. This example is not meant to be exhaustive 
but rather, a simple illustration of how soft  skills can be utilized to engage a client, to build rapport, to 
create a feeling of comfort and confidence in the client and ultimately, to build a long -lasting, open 
relationship between a planner and his or her client.  
Scenario: Armando and Janice  
It is February 27th and Armando, who is 48 years old, is at his bank to make a last minute contribution to 
his RRSP. Armando has never been accused of having a sunny disposition or seeing life through rose 
coloured glasses so, needless to say, his demeanou r has not been improved by the fact he has been kept 
waiting to see an advisor. After 20 minutes, Armando is finally greeted by Janice, a personal banker, who 
specializes in retirement planning. A dialogue between Armando and Janice ensues:  
 
